=== PAGE 1 ===


=== PAGE 2 ===
Four Against
Darkness
A solitaire dungeon-delving pen-and-paper game

=== PAGE 3 ===
Four Against Darkness
Written and illustrated by Andrea Sfiligoi
Some art by Heather Shinn and J.M.Woiak of the STINKYGOBLIN.
Some art by Jack Badashski.
Edited by Craig Whiting
Dungeon flowchart by Victor Jarmusz
Pocket booklets formatted by Wes Camp
Playtesters: Samuele Mariotti, Andrea Sfiligoi, Craig Whiting, Victor
Jarmusz, Diego Chisena, Diego Riccitelli, Massimo Moscarelli
Cover painting reference pictures and models: fantasystock,
valentine_fov_stock, mjranum stock, castock, liancary stock,
phelendavion, minotaur queen, valerianastock, dragon orb
For more rulebooks visit www.ganeshagames.net
For miniatures visit www.songofblades.com
Questions? Suggestions? Contact the author at andreasfiligoi@gmail.com,
via our Facebook (www.facebook.com/ganeshagamesfantasy/) or via the
Song of Blades Yahoo! Group.
2

=== PAGE 4 ===
Four Against Darkness
Contents Epic Rewards table (d6) 40
Moving Through The Dungeon 41
Warrior 8 Running out of Paper? 41
No Room for a Room? 41
Cleric 9
Retracing Your Steps 41
Rogue 10 The Final Boss 43
Time Limits 43
Wizard 11
Let’s Get Outta Here! 43
Splitting the Party 44
Barbarian 12
Fallen Heroes 44
Elf 13 Maximum Levels 45
Increasing Life with Level 45
Dwarf 14
Spells 47
Halfling 15
Encounters 48
Equipment 16
Random Spell Table (d6) 47
Buying Equipment 16
Marching Order 48
Crushing or Slashing? 18
When Do Monsters Attack? 49
Selling equipment 19
Defense Roll Modifiers 49
Who is Attacked? 50
Leveling Up 45
Running Away From Combat 52
Entrance Rooms 25 When Monsters Flee 52
Room Contents Table (2d6) 31 When Does a Combat End? 52
Special Feature table (d6) 32 Looting 53
Special Events table (d6) 33 Carrying Loot 53
Treasure table (d6) 34 Searching Rooms 53
Magic Treasure table (d6) 34 Empty Room Search Table (d6) 53
Vermin table (d6) 35 Wandering Monsters 54
Minions table (d6) 36 Secret Door 54
Boss table (d6) 37 Hidden Treasure 55
Weird Monsters table (d6) 38 Clues 55
Quest table (d6) 39 Hidden Treasure Complication (d6) 55
3

=== PAGE 5 ===
Four Against Darkness
Clues and Dying Characters 57 Quest table (d6) 76
Epic Rewards table (d6) 76
Traps 59
Traps table (d6) 59
Rogues Disarming Traps 60
Locked Doors 60
Save Versus… 61
What’s on the Deeper Levels? 61
Things to Remember 62
Frequently Asked Questions 64
Play Sheet 68
Monsters Killed 69
Quick Reference Sheet 71
Room Contents Table (2d6) 72
Special Feature table (d6) 72
Traps table (d6) 72
Special Events table (d6) 73
Treasure table (d6) 73
Magic Treasure table (d6) 73
Vermin table (d6) 74
Minions table (d6) 74
Random Spell Table (d6) 74
Hidden Treasure Complication (d6) 74
Boss table (d6) 75
Weird Monsters table (d6) 75
4

=== PAGE 6 ===
Four Against Darkness
Introduction numbers, with some modifications.
Try running three adventurers per
This is an old-school dungeon- player, doubling the number of all
bashing solo game that can be monsters and treasure found, and
played with minimum space and increasing the difficulty of all non-
equipment. You’ll need pencil, two monster dangers (traps, saving
dice, and graph paper. You can also rolls, etc.) by 1.
play on a dry-erase whiteboard, or
even use any dungeon tiles already Length of the Game
in your possession. You can play it
Your first game will take a bit longer
solo, or play cooperatively sharing
than an hour. After you familiarize
the characters with a friend or two.
yourself with the mechanics, a
You control a party of four heroes
typical solo game lasts about 45
who adventure into a dungeon
minutes. Cooperative games last
generated by dice rolls. If you have
longer due to the discussions that
miniatures, you may use them to
arise among participants.
mark their marching order, but this
is not essential. The game can also Monsters Roll No Dice
be played with two players each
All the rolls in the game are
running a party of dungeon
performed by characters. The
explorers and taking turns to
power and danger level of a
generate one room each, as their
monster is indicated by a number,
parties advance through different
that is the monster’s “level”. When
paths. In this case, roll a die to
the characters attack, they perform
determine which party goes first
attack rolls and compare them with
every turn.
the monsters’ level to determine if
the monsters are killed. When it is
Why Four?
the monsters’ turn to attack, your
A party of four characters is the
characters perform defense rolls
optimum to have enough variety of
versus the monsters' level, taking
abilities. Four characters are not
wounds if they fail.
too difficult to control for a single
player, and allow for the occasional Dice Codes
non-player character joining the
The game uses regular six-sided
party. If you play cooperatively, the
dice, annotated as d6. We use the
game can work with larger
following dice codes:
5

=== PAGE 7 ===
Four Against Darkness
D6: roll a die.
D6 +1: roll a die and add 1 to the
result.
2d6: roll two dice and add them.
2d6 +1: roll two dice, add them
together, and add 1 to the total.
D6 x d6: roll two dice and multiply
the result of one die by the other,
generating a number from 1 to 36.
D6-1: roll one die and subtract 1
from the result, generating a
number from 0 to 5.
D6 + L : roll a die and add the
character’s level.
D6 + ½ L : roll a die and add half the
character’s level, rounded down.
D66: roll two dice of different color,
reading the first as “tens” and the
second as “units”, generating a
number from 11 to 66.
Explosive Six Rule
Whenever you roll a 6 performing
any character action, immediately
roll another d6 and add the result
to the total. This is cumulative: if
you roll another 6, roll again and
add it to the total. With enough
luck, you could roll ANY number. In
combat, this will let you kill multiple
minions with a lucky blow. In other
situations, it will let a character save
against a threat higher than 6.
6

=== PAGE 8 ===
Four Against Darkness
The Party A character is described by his
name, level, and character type. For
You have a party of four example: Bruggo, level 2 rogue. Each
adventurers. Each belongs to one character has an Attack value
of the following classes: warrior, (describing how powerful he is in
cleric, rogue, wizard, barbarian, combat), a Defense Value
dwarf, halfling, or elf. Each class has (describing how well protected he
special abilities and weaknesses is, or how skilled he is in parrying
that will become evident during the or dodging), and a Life value (the
game. For example, a wizard is number of wounds that the
weak in combat but is good at character can take before dying).
casting spells and at solving The profile sheet has spaces for the
puzzles. Elves and halflings are character’s special skills (such as a
more agile than other characters. wizard’s spells), treasure, and
Warriors and barbarians can equipment.
withstand more punishment.
Barbarians are the toughest, but
Creating Your
they cannot wear the best armor
and may not use any magic items
Party
due to their superstitious fear of
magic. A good party generally has
At the beginning of the game, your
a mixture of classes.
four heroes are just starting out
Your characters can be of any
their adventuring career. They are
gender, but for brevity we use
all level 1. Each belongs to one of
masculine pronouns in the
the classes described below. Traits
rulebook.
are the rules that differentiate a
Print out a copy of the Party Sheet class from another: skills,
at the end of the book to keep track equipment that the character can
of your characters’ wounds, use, and limitations. Each class lists
possessions, gold, and level. These also some basic equipment and a
numbers will change throughout few coins.
the game, so use a pencil.
All your characters begin as first
level adventurers.
7

=== PAGE 9 ===
Four Against Darkness
Warrior
Traits: A warrior adds his level to his Attack
rolls. A warrior may use a shield, light
armor, heavy armor, and any weapon.
Starting equipment: A warrior begins the
game with light armor, shield and a hand
weapon. He may trade in his shield and
hand weapon for a two-handed weapon or
a bow if he wants.
Starting wealth:
2d6 gold pieces.
Life points: 6 +
level. A first level
warrior has 7 life.
8

=== PAGE 10 ===
Four Against Darkness
Cleric allows the cleric to heal a number
of life points equal to d6 plus his
level. The cleric may use
healing at any moment,
even during a fight, but
he may not attack on the
same turn In which he
heals someone. A cleric
may use healing on
himself or on a friend.
Starting equipment:
Light armor, shield, hand
weapon. He may trade in
his shield and hand
weapon for a two-
handed weapon. Clerics
usually prefer crushing
weapons because the
chances of meeting
skeletons and skeletal
rats in dungeons are
pretty high.
Starting wealth: d6 gold
pieces.
Traits: A cleric adds half of his level Life: 4 + level. A first level cleric has
(rounded down) to his Attack rolls, 5 life.
and his full level when he attacks
undead creatures. He may wear
light or heavy armor and use a
shield, a hand weapon, a two-
handed weapon, or a sling.
A cleric may cast the Blessing spell
up to three times per adventure. A
cleric may use the Healing power
three times per game. This power
9

=== PAGE 11 ===
Four Against Darkness
Rogue orc, so now the adventurers
outnumber the orcs 4 to 3.
Traits: A rogue adds his level on When the rogue’s turn to
rolls to disarm traps and to his attack comes, the rogue adds
Defense rolls. A rogue may wear his level to his Attack roll. This
only light armor and may not use represents the rogue slipping
heavy weapons or shields. past an enemy and stabbing
him in the back.
A rogue adds his level to his Attack
rolls only when attacking an Starting equipment: A rope, lock
outnumbered minion, i.e. if the picks, light armor, and a light hand
party is more numerous than a weapon.
group of minions.
Starting wealth: 3d6 gold pieces.
Example: a party of four Life: 3 + level. A first level rogue has
including a rogue attacks four 4 life.
orcs. The party’s cleric kills an
10

=== PAGE 12 ===
Four Against Darkness
Wizard
Starting equipment: Light hand
Traits: A wizard (or sorceress) adds
weapon, spell-book, and writing
his level only when attacking with
implements.
spells, or on rolls to solve puzzles
Starting wealth: 4d6 gold pieces.
or riddles. A wizard may use only
light weapons or a sling. He may Life: 2 + level. A first level wizard
not wear armor or use a shield. has 3 life points.
A wizard begins the
game with two
spells, plus one
spell per level, so a
first level wizard
has 3 spells. The
wizard must decide
which spells he has
prepared before
starting the
adventure. He may
prepare multiple
copies of the same
spell, or any
combination of the
six spells allowed in
the game. A wizard
may find additional
spells in
adventures, and
add them to the
repertoire of spells
that he can
prepare. Spells
acquired when
leveling up may be
used immediately.
11

=== PAGE 13 ===
Four Against Darkness
Barbarian
Traits: A barbarian adds his level to his Attack rolls. A barbarian may use a shield
and light armor, and any weapon. A barbarian may not wear heavy armor.
A barbarian may not use magic items, scrolls, or potions. He may grudgingly
accept the healing from a cleric, since that’s technically not magic but divine favor,
and may use holy water.
Once per game, a
barbarian may
perform a rage
attack. During a
rage attack, roll
the Attack die
three times, and
choose the best
result. If the rage
attack hits a boss
monster, it inflicts
two wounds.
Starting
equipment: Light
armor, shield, and
a hand weapon.
You may trade in
his shield and
hand weapon for
a two-handed
weapon or for a
bow.
Starting wealth:
d6 gold pieces.
Life: 7 + level. A
first level barbarian
has 8 life points.
12

=== PAGE 14 ===
Four Against Darkness
Elf Starting equipment: light armor,
hand weapon, bow.
Traits: An elf adds his level to
Starting wealth: 2d6 gold pieces.
Attack rolls. An elf can advance up
Life: 4 + level. A first level elf has 5
to the 3rd level, maximum.
life points.
The elf can wear light or heavy
armor and may use a
shield. He can cast a
single spell per level per
adventure, but only if he
is wearing light armor
and NOT using a shield.
An Elf may carry a shield
strapped to his back and
waste one attack to
ready the shield.
A 2nd level elf may
prepare two spells, and
a third level elf may
prepare three spells. For
spell casting purposes,
the elf adds his level, like
a wizard.
An elf has +1 to his Attack
or spell roll when fighting
orcs.
Like a wizard, an elf may
find additional spells in
adventures, and add
them to the repertoire of
spells that he can
prepare. Spells added
when leveling up may be
used immediately.
13

=== PAGE 15 ===
Four Against Darkness
Dwarf Dwarves are natural goldsmith and
gem experts. When you sell a gem
Traits: A dwarf adds his level to or jewelry item, if you have a dwarf
Attack rolls, except when using in the party, you are paid 20% more
ranged weapons like bows, for the gem (round fractions down).
crossbows, or slings. Dwarves have
Starting equipment: light armor,
+1 to their Defense rolls against
shield, hand weapon, OR heavy
trolls, ogres, and giants, and +1 to
armor and two-handed weapon.
their Attack rolls against goblins.
Starting wealth: 3d6 gold pieces.
A dwarf can wear any armor and
Life: 5 + level. A first level dwarf has
use any weapon. A dwarf may
6 life points.
advance up to 4th level, maximum.
Dwarves can smell gold and jewels.
When you meet a monster, if you
have a dwarf in the party, roll a die
and add the dwarf’s level. If the
total is 6 or better, you may
determine the monster’s treasure
BEFORE deciding to attack the
monster.
Dwarves are extremely
attached to their gold: a
party with 2 or more
dwarves may not bribe
monsters!
When you find treasure
that can be split (such as
coins), you must
always assign at
least one coin
to every dwarf
in the party, if
possible.
14

=== PAGE 16 ===
Four Against Darkness
Halfling Attack or Defense roll, or to run
away from a combat without
Traits: A halfling may wear only receiving an attack (see running
light armor and use only light hand away from combats in the
weapons and slings. Halflings may Encounters section). You may not
not use shields. Halflings add their reroll a reroll, and the result of a
level to their Defense rolls against reroll stands, even if it worse than
giants, trolls, and ogres. Halflings the original roll.
can advance up to the 3rd level,
Starting equipment: Lots of
maximum.
snacks, sling, light hand weapon.
Halflings have a number of Luck
Starting wealth: 2d6 gold pieces.
points equal to their level, plus one.
Life: 3 + level. A first level halfling
During an adventure, a halfling may
has 4 life points.
spend a Luck point to reroll a failed
15

=== PAGE 17 ===
Four Against Darkness
Equipment
You may move gold pieces
Money may be used to bribe
between characters at any time
monsters, to pay the services of
during the game, but not during a
healers and alchemists, to buy
combat. After all, they are friends.
weapons and other equipment, or
They may decide to pool their
even to resurrect a dead friend.
resources to make sure that the
group’s best fighter buys the best
Buying Equipment
weapon they can afford, or a
Equipment may be bought before blessing spell so that a colleague
the game, or between games. Here turned to stone by a medusa gets
is a list of items a character can buy, back into action.
and their price in gold pieces (gp):
Bandages: Each character can
Bandage 5 gp apply bandages once per
adventure, healing one lost life. The
Blessing spell 100 gp
effect of bandages is cumulative
Bow 15 gp
with magical healing from potions
Hand weapon 6 gp or spells. Bandages may not be
applied during combat.
Heavy armor 30 gp
Blessing spell: The characters pay
Holy water vial 30 gp
the local church to cast a Blessing
Lantern 4 gp
spell, to remove a game condition
Light armor 10 gp such as being cursed or turned to
stone from a party member.
Light hand weapon 5 gp
Bow: This lets a character perform
Potion of healing 100 gp
a single attack before the monsters
Resurrection ritual 1000 gp
can act EVEN when the monsters
Rope 4 gp act before the party. Then the bow
may no longer be used as the
Shield 5 gp
monsters and the characters are
Sling 4 gp
assumed to be in close combat. The
Two-handed weapon 15 gp bow user will need to spend a turn
to put away the bow and draw
another weapon.
16

=== PAGE 18 ===
Four Against Darkness
Arrows are considered slashing clerics through a lengthy procedure
weapons. of chanting and purification in a
silver basin. A vial of holy water, if
You may assume that a character
thrown as an attack against a
carries all arrows that he will need,
creature susceptible to it (vampires,
and that his quiver gets
demons), automatically inflicts 1
replenished between games. If you
wound upon the creature. The
do not mind the additional book-
church restricts the use of holy
keeping, you may keep track of how
water, so a party may buy a
many arrows the character uses.
maximum of one vial per character.
The character begins the game with
a quiver of 12 arrows. All the Lantern: A party must have at least
arrows used in the game are lost or one lantern, and assign it to a
damaged. A character can buy character. That character must use
more arrows, at the cost of 6 gp per one hand to carry the lantern and
dozen. The maximum a character may not use a bow, a shield, or a
can carry is 48 arrows. two-handed weapon. If the lantern-
bearer is killed, another character
Hand Weapon: This is a standard
must pick the lantern up at the end
weapon like a sword, axe, or mace.
of the current combat. You may
Choose whether you want a
also decide to carry more than one
crushing or a slashing weapon.
lantern, just in case.
Heavy Armor: A suit of heavy
Light armor: Light armor adds +1
armor adds +2 to the wearer’s
to the wearer’s Defense rolls.
Defense rolls. Certain attacks from
Certain attacks from monsters
monsters will ignore this bonus.
ignore this bonus. When the
Heavy armor makes the wearer
original wearer dies, you may
slow, so in certain cases, the
reassign light armor to another
character will have a negative
wearer of the same species (a
modifier on his Save rolls. Heavy
dwarf’s light armor will fit another
armor is designed to fit one wearer,
dwarf but not an elf, halfling, or
so you may not reassign it to
human).
another character if the original
wearer dies. Light hand weapon: this weapon
gives the user a -1 on Attack rolls.
Holy Water Vial: Holy water is
purified water created by high-level
17

=== PAGE 19 ===
Four Against Darkness
Choose whether your weapon Crushing or Slashing?
deals crushing or slashing damage.
When you choose a weapon for a
Potion of healing: drinking the character, choose whether it deals
content of this vial, even in the crushing or slashing damage.
middle of an encounter, will restore
Crushing weapons are blunt
a character’s Life to its initial level.
trauma weapons that are better
No character may drink more than
against fragile enemies, like
one potion of healing per
skeletons, that would break under
adventure.
the blows. Examples:
Resurrection spell: This is bought
● Crushing light hand weapons:
between games to have a chance
club, staff, cudgel, shillelagh, jo
to resurrect a dead party member.
stick, nunchaku, walking stick,
Rope: This may be necessary to tie wizard’s staff.
up a defeated monster.
● Crushing hand weapons: metal
Shield: This gives a +1 to the user’s rod, mace, hammer.
Defense rolls. This bonus does not
● Crushing two handed weapons:
apply when the character is fleeing
maul, war-hammer, huge war-
from a combat or when he is
club, quarterstaff.
surprised by wandering monsters.
● Crushing missile weapons:
Certain attacks from monsters will
throwing stick, sling.
ignore the shield bonus.
Slashing weapons are bladed or
Sling: This weapon works like a
pointed weapons that inflict
bow, but at -1. Bullets from a sling
damage by cutting and puncturing.
are treated as crushing weapons.
They may be envenomed.
Two-handed weapon: This
Examples:
weapon requires two hands to be
● Slashing light hand weapons:
used (so the user cannot carry a
dagger, knife, short sword.
shield or a lantern) but gives +1 to
the wielder’s Attack rolls. Choose ● Slashing hand weapons: sword,
whether your two-handed weapon axe, rapier, sabre, spear.
deals crushing or slashing damage.
● Slashing two handed weapons:
pike, long spear, two handed
18

=== PAGE 20 ===
Four Against Darkness
sword, halberd, naginata,
glaive.
● Slashing missile weapons: bow,
crossbow.
Some monsters are hit at +1 by the
right weapon type, and at -1 by the
wrong weapon type.
You may carry more than one
weapon. During combat, you must
spend a turn to exchange
weapons. Note on your profile
your “default” weapon on your
profile. That’s the one you’ll be
wielding when wandering
monsters sneak on you or
when you enter a room.
Selling equipment
If you sell equipment, you get
half its cost in gp, rounded
down.
Magic equipment may be sold
but not bought. Potions and
enchanted rings may be sold
for 50 gp. Wands, scrolls, and
staves may be sold for 100 gp
per every spell they contain.
Other magic equipment will
net you d6 x d6 gp. Magic
equipment described in
adventures or supplements
will have its own gp cost.
19

=== PAGE 21 ===
Four Against Darkness
How To Attack Example: Your 5th level cleric
attacks a skeleton, using a
Monsters
two-handed mace. You roll
d6, +2 for being 5th level (half
You will encounter monsters and
level, rounded down), +1 for
often you will have to fight them.
using a two-handed weapon,
Each monster has a level, a
+1 for using a crushing
measure of how dangerous it is.
weapon against a skeleton.
The level is the number you must
roll to wound the monster, to Example 2: Your 4th level
defend from his attacks, or to affect Warrior attacks using a
him with a spell. sword. You roll d6+4 (the
character’s level).
Example: A goblin is level 3, so
you need to roll a 3 or better Example 3: Your wizard
to wound him, affect him with attacks with a dagger (light
a spell, or parry his blows. weapon). You roll d6 -1 (for a
light weapon). No level bonus
An attack on a monster is
is added: a 5th level wizard
performed with a d6 roll. Warriors,
fights like a 1st level wizard.
elves, dwarves, and barbarians add
their level to the roll. For example,
a 3rd level barbarian will roll d6+3.
Clerics add half their level, rounded The Monsters
down. For example, a 3rd level cleric
Monsters are of two types: Minions
will roll d6+1. Wizards add their
(creatures from the minions and
level only if casting a spell. Rogues
the vermin tables) and Bosses
add their level only when attacking
(creatures from the weird monsters
an outnumbered minion.
and boss tables).
The attack roll is modified by
Minions are encountered in large
weapon type: a two-handed
numbers. They have 1 life each.
weapon adds +1, and a light
Every successful attack kills one.
weapon, such as a club or knife,
When a group of minions loses
subtracts 1. Some weapons have
more than half its initial number
bonuses against specific monsters,
(for example, if a group of 8 loses
for example crushing weapons hit
5), the remaining minions must
skeletons at +1.
make a morale roll. Roll d6 for the
20

=== PAGE 22 ===


=== PAGE 23 ===
Four Against Darkness
whole group. If you roll 3 or less, when you inflict a total of 3
the remaining monsters flee. If you points of damage. This means
roll 4 or better, the monsters that it becomes easier to hit
continue to fight. You perform one the monster and to avoid its
morale roll per encounter, unless attacks.
the monster’s profile says
otherwise. Cowardly or courageous Fleeing Monsters
monsters may have a +1 or -1
Monsters that flee just disappear
modifier to their morale roll. Some
from the game. You may not chase
monsters never roll morale. This is
them. You still gain their treasure.
indicated in the monsters’ profile.
Monsters who “fight to the death” Monster Reactions
(see monster reactions, below) do
In general, your party has the
not test morale.
option to act before the monsters.
Bosses are tougher than minions. When you encounter monsters,
They have multiple life points, like you may:
characters. Some perform more
1) Attack them right away, or
than one attack per turn. Every
successful hit on a Boss depletes 2) Let the monsters act first and see
one of their life points. When a boss what they do.
loses more than half of his life Every monster has a reactions table
points, his level drops by one, and under its description. Roll d6 on the
he must make a morale roll. Roll a table to determine what the
die, and if the result is 3 or less, the monster will do. For minions, make
boss flees. If the roll is 4 or better, a single roll for the whole group.
the boss continues to fight to the The following results are possible:
bitter end. When his life points
Offer food and rest: The monster
reach zero, the boss is dead, and
offers food, rest, and tending of
his body and room can be looted
wounds. You may heal one wound
for treasure.
per character.
Important: the boss’ level Peaceful: The monster will not
drops IMMEDIATELY as soon attack. You may move through the
as you reduce his life total to room as desired but the monster
less than half. For example, a will not help you in any way.
level 6 boss with 5 life points
becomes a level 5 creature
22

=== PAGE 24 ===
Four Against Darkness
Flee: The monster turns tail and solved, the monster attacks the
flees. The monster disappears from party, going first in the turn. You get
the game. You may NOT loot his only one chance to solve a Puzzle.
body.
Quest: The monster asks you to
Flee if Outnumbered: The perform a quest. You may accept
monsters flee only if there are or refuse the quest. If you accept,
fewer monsters than party roll on the Quest table to
members. Otherwise, the monsters determine your mission. If
fight. complete the quest, as soon as you
come back to the room where you
Bribe: The monsters ask for a bribe
encountered the monster, roll on
(a fixed or random amount of gold
the Epic Rewards table to
pieces, as shown on the Reaction
determine your reward. If you
table). If you pay the bribe, the
refuse the quest, the monster
monsters will leave you alone. If
leaves.
you do not or cannot pay, they fight.
Magic Challenge: If your party has
Fight: The monsters fight. The
at least one wizard, or a magic item
monsters go first in the combat
allowing you cast a spell, the
round. Monsters may be required
monster will challenge your spell-
to test morale when reduced under
caster to a magic duel. The other
50% of their initial number/life
characters may not intervene. Roll
points, unless their profile or the
d6 for the wizard, adding his level,
adventure states that they will not
and if the result equals or
check morale.
surpasses the monster’s level, the
Fight to the Death: The monster
wizard wins: the monster walks
will fight to the death, asking for no
away and you may take its
quarter and giving none. Monsters
treasure. If the wizard loses, he
who fight to the death do not test
loses a level (a wizard may be
morale.
demoted to level 0, losing the
Puzzle: The monster will ask the ability to cast spells until he
party to solve a puzzle or answer a performs an XP roll and goes back
riddle. The Puzzle has a level. If you to level 1) A 0 level wizard succeeds
roll its level or better on d6, the on an xp roll on a 2 or better (a roll
Puzzle is solved and the monster of 1 is still a failure).
lets you go. Wizards add their level
If you cannot or do not want to
to the roll. If the Puzzle is not
accept the magic challenge, or if
23

=== PAGE 25 ===
Four Against Darkness
your wizard loses the challenge, the
monster will fight. Monsters losing
a magic challenge count as
defeated and count for purposes
of xp rolls.
Special: Monsters in published
adventures and supplements may
have other reactions.
24

=== PAGE 26 ===
Four Against Darkness
Entrance Rooms
Roll d6 to determine which is the entrance to your dungeon. Draw it at
the center of the lower edge of your sheet. Then choose a door and roll
d66 on the following five pages to generate a room.
Any room that is only one square wide is a corridor. Any room that is
2 or more squares wide is a room. This has a bearing in the game, as
corridors are more likely to be empty.
25

=== PAGE 27 ===
Four Against Darkness
26

=== PAGE 28 ===
Four Against Darkness
27

=== PAGE 29 ===
Four Against Darkness
28

=== PAGE 30 ===
Four Against Darkness
29

=== PAGE 31 ===
Four Against Darkness
30

=== PAGE 32 ===
Four Against Darkness
Room Contents Table (2d6)
2 Treasure found: roll on the Treasure table.
Treasure protected by a trap. Roll on the Traps table and on the
3
Treasure table.
4 If corridor, empty. Otherwise, roll on the Special Events table.
5 Empty, but roll on the Special Feature table.
6 Roll on the Vermin table.
7 Roll on the Minions table
8 If corridor, empty. Otherwise, roll on the Minions table.
9 Empty.
10 If corridor, empty. Otherwise, roll on Weird Monsters table.
Roll on the Boss table. Then roll d6. Add +1 for every boss or weird
11 monster that you have encountered so far in the game. if your total is
6+, or if the dungeon layout is complete, this is the final boss.
Empty if corridor. Otherwise, the room is a small dragon’s lair (see the
12 Boss table for dragon rules). The small dragon counts as a boss and
may be the final boss.
When a room or corridor is empty, maybe it just appears so… You
may search an empty room to determine whether there is something
hidden. You might get lucky and find hidden treasures, or even clues
to the darkest secrets of the dungeon. Rules for exploration are on
p 53. However, searching is a dangerous activity. The characters
slow down, remove their helmets to see better, sheathe their
weapons to inspect things, and their constant tapping on walls and
floors may attract unwanted attention.
31

=== PAGE 33 ===
Four Against Darkness
Special Feature table (d6)
Fountain: All wounded characters recover 1 Life the first time they
1
encounter a fountain in an adventure. Further fountains have no effect.
BlessedTemple: A character of your choice gains a +1 on Attack
2 against undead monsters or demons. As soon as the character kills at
least one undead or demon, the bonus is gone.
Armory: All characters can change their weapons if they want, within
the limits of the weapons allowed to their character type. For example,
3
a Warrior who was using a sword and shield may discard his shield and
take a two-handed weapon, or exchange his sword for a mace.
CursedAltar: As you enter the room, an eerie glow emanates from a
sinister altar. A random character is cursed and has now -1 on his
4 Defense rolls. To break the curse, the character must either slay a boss
monster alone, or enter a Blessed Temple (see 2, above), or have a
Blessing spell cast on himself by a cleric.
Statue: you may leave the statue alone or touch it. If you touch it, roll
d6. On a 1–3, the statue awakens and attacks your party (level 4 boss
5 with 6 life points, immune to all spells; if you defeat it, you find 3d6 x 10
gold pieces inside). On a 4-6, the statue breaks, and you find 3d6 x 10
gold pieces inside.
PuzzleRoom: the room contains a puzzle box. Its level is d6. You may
leave it alone or try to solve it. For every failed attempt, the character
6 trying to solve it loses 1 life. Wizards and rogues add their level to their
puzzle-solving roll. If the puzzle is solved, the box opens: make a
Treasure roll to determine its contents.
32

=== PAGE 34 ===
Four Against Darkness
Special Events table (d6)
A ghost passes through the party. All characters must save versus level
1
4 fear or lose 1 life. A cleric adds his level to this roll.
Wandering monsters attack the party. Roll d6: 1-3 roll on the vermin
table, 4 roll on the minions table, 5 roll on the weird monsters table, 6
2
roll on the boss table. Reroll any small dragons. A boss monster met as
a wandering monster has no chance of being the final boss.
A lady in white appears and asks the party to complete a quest. If you
3 accept, roll on the Quest table. If you refuse, she disappears. Ignore any
further appearances of the Lady in White in the game.
4 Trap! Roll on the traps table.
You meet a wandering healer. He will heal your party at the cost of 10
gold pieces per life healed. You may heal as many life points as you can
5
afford. You can meet the healer only once per game. If you meet him
again, reroll this result.
You meet a wandering alchemist. He will sell you up to one potion of
healing per party member (50 gold pieces each) or a single dose of
blade poison (30 gold pieces). The potion of healing will heal all lost life
points to a single character, and can be swallowed at any moment
during the game as a free action. The blade poison lets you envenom a
6 single arrow or slashing weapon (not a crushing weapon). That weapon
will have a +1 on Attack against the first enemy you fight. Poison will not
work on undead monsters, demons, blobs, automatons, or living
statues.
You can meet a wandering alchemist only once per game. If you meet
him again, treat this result as a trap.
33

=== PAGE 35 ===
Four Against Darkness
Treasure table (d6)
0 or
No treasure found
less
1 d6 gold pieces
2 2d6 gold pieces
3 A scroll with a random spell
4 One gem worth 2d6 x 5 gold pieces
5 One item of jewelry worth 3d6 x 10 gold pieces
6 or
One random magic item from the Magic Treasure table below.
more
Magic Treasure table (d6)
Wandof Sleep: allows user to cast Sleep spell 3 times before its
energy is depleted. Only wizards and elves may use it. Add the user’s
1
level to determine the spell roll, as you would do for a Sleep spell cast
by that character.
Ring of Teleportation: allows user to automatically pass a Defense
roll by moving that character out of the room. That character may not
2 take part in the current combat, but rejoins the party as soon as the
combat is over. After one use, the ring loses its powers and becomes
a simple golden ring worth 1d6+1 gold pieces.
FoolsGold. These magical (but fake) gold pieces will let the user
automatically bribe the next monster that asks for a bribe. No matter
3
what the monster asks, the gold will appear enough to satisfy his
greed. This is a one-use magic item.
Magic Weapon. Gives +1 to its user’s Attack rolls. This is a permanent
magic item. Roll d6 to determine its type: 1 crushing light hand
4
weapon, 2 slashing light hand weapon, 3 crushing hand weapon, 4-5
slashing hand weapon, 6 bow.
Potion of Healing: Can be swallowed at any moment, healing all lost
5 life to a single character. This does not require an action. This is a
one-use magic item, usable by all classes except barbarians.
Fireball Staff: This staff allows its user to cast Fireball spell twice,
then its powers are depleted. Only wizards may use it. Add the user’s
6
level to determine the spell roll, as you would do for a Fireball spell
cast by that character.
34

=== PAGE 36 ===
Four Against Darkness
Vermin table (d6)
1 3d6 rats Level 1, no treasure. Any character wounded has a 1 in 6
chance of losing 1 additional life due to an infected wound.
Reactions (d6): 1–3 flee, 4–6 fight
3d6 vampire bats, level 1, no treasure. Spells are cast at -1 due to
2 their distracting shrieking.
Reactions (d6): 1–3 flee, 4–6 fight
2d6 goblin swarmlings, level 3, treasure -1, morale -1
3 Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-3 flee if outnumbered, 4 bribe (5 gp x goblin),
5–6 fight.
D6 giant centipedes, level 3, no treasure. Any character wounded
by a giant centipede must save versus level 2 poison or lose 1
4
additional life.
Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-3 flee if outnumbered, 4-6 fight.
D6 vampire frogs, level 4, treasure -1.
5
Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-4 fight, 5-6 fight to the death
2d6 skeletal rats, level 3 undead, no treasure. Crushing weapon
attacks are at +1 against skeletal rats, but they cannot be attacked
6
by bows and slings.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 flee, 3-6 fight
Vermin are a sub-class of minions. Defeating them gives no XP roll.
35

=== PAGE 37 ===
Four Against Darkness
Minions table (d6)
D6+2 skeletons or d6 zombies (50% chance of each). Level 3 undead.
No treasure. Crushing weapons attack Skeletons at +1. Arrows are at -1
1 against both skeletons and zombies. Skeletons and zombies never test
morale.
Reactions: always fight to the death.
d6+3 goblins. Level 3, treasure -1. Goblins have a 1 in 6 chance of
gaining surprise, thus acting before the party. If they do act before the
2 party, roll d6 on their reactions table below.
Reactions (d6): 1 flee if outnumbered, 2-3 bribe (5 gp per goblin), 4–6
fight.
d6 hobgoblins. Level 4, Treasure +1.
3 Reactions (d6): 1 flee if outnumbered, 2–3 bribe (10 gp per hobgoblin),
4–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
D6+1 orcs. Level 4. Orcs are afraid of magic and must test morale each
time one or more is killed by a spell. If a spell caused their number to
drop below 50%, they will test morale at -1. They never have magic
4
items in their treasure: treat any rolled magic as d6 x d6 gold pieces
instead.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 bribe (10 gp per orc), 3–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
d3 trolls. Level 5, Treasure: normal. Trolls regenerate, unless killed by a
spell, or unless a character uses one attack to chop an already killed
troll to bits. If this does not happen, roll a die for every killed troll on its
5 next turn. On a 5 or 6, the troll will come back to life and continue to
fight.
Reactions (d6): 1–2 fight, 3–6 fight to the death. If a dwarf is present in
the party, trolls will automatically fight to the death.
2d6 Fungi Folk. Level 3, Treasure: normal. Any character taking
damage from the fungi folk must save versus level 3 poison or lose 1
6
life. Halflings add their level on this save.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 ask for bribe (d6 gp per fungus), 3–6 fight.
Keep a tally of how many minion encounters you have. Surviving 10
encounters with minions gives you one XP roll at -1.
36

=== PAGE 38 ===
Four Against Darkness
Boss table (d6)
Mummy. Level 5 undead, 4 life points, 2 attacks, treasure +2. Any
character killed by a mummy becomes another mummy and must be
1 fought by the party. Mummies are attacked at +2 by the Fireball spell.
Mummies never test morale.
Reactions: always fight.
Orc Brute. Level 5, 5 life points, 2 attacks, treasure +1 but may not have
2 any magic items, treat as 2d6 x d6 gold pieces instead.
Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (50 gp), 2–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
Ogre. Level 5, 6 life points, normal treasure. Each hit from an ogre
3 inflicts 2 life points of damage.
Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (30 gp), 2–3 fight, 4–6 fight to the death.
Medusa. Level 4, 4 life points, treasure +1. All characters at the
beginning of the battle must save versus a level 4 gaze attack or be
4 turned to stone. Petrified characters are out of the game until a Blessing
spell is cast on them. Rogues add half their level to this save.
Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (6d6 gp), 2 quest, 3–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
ChaosLord. Level 6, 4 life, 3 attacks, 2 treasure rolls at +1. Before the
fight begins, roll d6 to determine if the Chaos Lord has any special
powers: 1–3 no powers, 4 evil eye (characters must roll 4+ or be at -1 on
all defense rolls until the chaos lord is slain), 5 energy drain (any
5 character taking a wound from the chaos lord must roll 4+ or lose 1
level), 6 hellfire blast (before combat, all character must roll 6+ or lose 2
life points; Clerics add ½ level to this roll). When you kill a chaos lord, roll
a die; on a 5 or 6 a character of your choice finds a Clue (see p. 55)
Reactions (d6): 1 flee if outnumbered, 2 fight, 3–6 fight to the death.
Small Dragon. Level 6, 5 life points, 2 attacks, 3 treasure rolls at +1. On
each turn of the dragon, roll d6, on a 1 or 2 the dragon breathes fire,
inflicting 1 life to all characters who fail to save versus level 6 dragon
breath (each character adds ½ level, rounded down). If the dragon does
6 not breathe, he bites 2 random characters. Small dragons are never met
as random monsters.
Reactions (d6): 1 Sleeping (all characters can attack at +2 on their first
attack), 2–3 bribe (all the gold of the party, with a minimum of 100 gold
or one magic item), 4–5 fight, 6 quest.
Defeating a boss gives one XP roll.
37

=== PAGE 39 ===
Four Against Darkness
Weird Monsters table (d6)
Minotaur. Level 5, 4 life points, 2 attacks, normal treasure. Due to the
power of his bull-rush charge, the first Defense roll against a minotaur is
1
at -1. Minotaurs hate halflings (actually, they love to eat them).
Reactions (d6): 1-2 bribe (60 gp), 3–4 fight, 6 fight to the death.
Iron Eater. Level 3, 4 life, 3 attacks, no treasure. Defense rolls against
the iron eater do not enjoy bonus from heavy armor (shield and light
armor count). If the monster hits, the character takes no damage but
2
loses his armor, shield, main weapon, or 3d6 gp, in this order.
Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-3 bribe (d6 gp to distract the creature; you may
not fool the creature with fools gold), 4-6 fight.
Chimera. Level 5, 6 life points, 3 attacks, normal treasure. On every of
the chimera’s turns, roll d6. On a 1 or 2 the chimera breathes fire
3 instead of performing its multiple attacks. All characters must save
versus level 4 fire or lose 1 life.
Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (50 gp), 2–6 fight.
Catoblepas. Level 4, 4 life points, treasure +1. All characters at the
4 beginning of the battle must save versus a level 4 gaze attack or lose 1
life. Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-6 fight
Giant Spider. Level 5, 3 life, 2 attacks, 2 treasure rolls. Characters taking
a wound must save versus level 3 poison or lose an additional life. Due
5 to the spider’s webbing, the party may not withdraw from this fight
unless they cast a Fireball spell to burn the webs.
Reactions: always fight.
Invisible Gremlins. A band of invisible gremlins steal d6+3 objects from
the party. You must surrender objects from any of your characters in
this order of preference: magic items, scrolls, potions, weapons, gems,
6 coins (in bundles of 10 gp each). If the gremlins steal ALL of your
equipment, they will leave a thank you message that counts as a clue.
The gremlins have no combat stats because it is impossible to fight
them. Encountering them gives no XP roll
Weird monsters are equivalent to bosses. Defeating a weird monster
gives one XP roll.
38

=== PAGE 40 ===
Four Against Darkness
Quest table (d6)
Bring me his head! The creature asks the party to kill a boss monster.
Roll on the boss table to determine who. The next time the party meets
1 a boss in a room, instead of rolling it up, you may use the boss from the
quest. Killing the boss and bringing its head to the creature’s room
completes the quest.
Bring me Gold! To complete the quest, the party must bring d6 x 50
2 worth of treasure to this room. If they already have that amount
available, the amount required to complete the quest is doubled.
I want him alive! As 1, above, but the party must subdue the boss, tie
him up with a rope, and take him to the creature’s room to complete
3 the quest. To subdue a monster, you must either use the Sleep spell or
fight with -1 on all Attack rolls (striking with the flat of the blade or trying
to knock out the boss instead of killing him).
Bring me that! Roll on the magic items table to determine what the
object is. Every time the party kills a boss, there is a 1 in 6 chance that
4 he will have that object in addition to his treasure, if any. To complete
the quest, the party must bring the object in the room where the quest
started.
Let peace be your way! To complete the quest, the party must
complete at least three encounters in the adventure in a non violent
5 way. This includes reactions such as bribing, getting help from
monsters, performing another quest (not this one!), or defeating a
monster with the Sleep spell and then tying him up with a rope.
Slay all the monsters! To complete the quest, all the dungeon rooms
must be laid out and all the occupants slain, with the exception of the
6
creature who sent the party on this quest. As soon as these conditions
are met, the party can claim their reward.
When a quest is completed, roll on the Epic Rewards table.
39

=== PAGE 41 ===
Four Against Darkness
Epic Rewards table (d6)
The Book of Skalitos. The party is given the spell book that belonged to
the legendary wizard Skalitos. This counts as one scroll of each of the six
spells. You may tear up the pages and distribute the six spells among
1 the party to use as scrolls, or leave the book as it is and assign it to only
one character. The book is old and fragile, and it is destroyed if the
character carrying it is killed by dragon breath. If unused, the book may
be sold for 650 gold pieces at the end of the adventure.
The Gold of Kerrak Dar! The party is given the location of the treasure
that belonged to a dwarf. As soon as the party searches a room and
2
generates at least one clue, they may use that clue to find a hidden
chest containing 500 gold pieces.
Enchanted weapon. One of the party’s weapons is enchanted and can
now roll two dice for its Attack rolls, choosing the best result. The
3
weapon can also hit monsters who are hit only by magic. The
enchantment lasts until the end of the adventure.
Shield of Warning. One of the party’s shields is now enchanted and
counts as protection even if the user is surprised by wandering
4 monsters or if the party is fleeing from a combat. If the party has no
shields, they will be given one. The shield of warning is permanent, and
will last throughout a campaign. It can be sold for 200 gold pieces.
Arrow of slaying. The party is given an arrow that will automatically
inflict 3 wounds upon a monster. Roll on the Boss table to determine
which monster is affected by the arrow. The arrow may be used only by
5
a character with a bow. It strikes automatically against its designed
monster target. Once used, the arrow breaks. If unused, an arrow of
slaying may be sold for 3d6 x 15 gold pieces.
Holy symbol of healing. The party is given a holy symbol that may be
used only by a cleric. The cleric will make all healing rolls at +2 until he
dies. When the cleric dies, the holy symbol can be bought to the cleric’s
6
church. If the symbol and the body of the slain cleric are delivered to the
church, an attempt to resurrect that cleric will be paid by the church. If
unused, the holy symbol can be sold for 700 gold pieces.
Each epic reward can happen only once per campaign. Mark the
reward when it is rolled. If it is rolled again, reroll until a different
reward is selected.
40

=== PAGE 42 ===
Four Against Darkness
Moving Through The Dungeon No Room for a Room?
The game does not use any formal If your random room roll creates a
way to mark the passage of time. room that won’t fit, for example
The characters simply move from because it would intersect with
room to room. If in a scenario it is another room or corridor, truncate
important to calculate the passage the room: it’s a dead end. It still
of time (for example, because there counts as a room or corridor, as per
is a game effect that will happen the random room roll, and you still
after a certain time), assume that roll for its content, even if it’ is only
each generated room or corridor one square in size.
equals 10 minutes of the
characters’ time. This may seem a Retracing Your Steps
lot but includes bandaging of
Sometimes you need to go back
wounds, counting coins and
through rooms that you have
splitting them among the party,
already visited. For every room or
resting, eating, and a lot of other
section of corridor that you visit,
minor activities that need not be
roll a die. On a 1, your party is
recorded.
attacked by wandering monsters.
Wandering monsters always sneak
Running out of Paper?
on you, so they attack first,
Your rooms may be drawn up to beginning with the characters at
the edge of the sheet of paper. We the rear of your marching order.
recommend using a sheet that is After one turn, if you are in a room,
20 squares in width by 28 squares the party will spread out and
in height. A slightly smaller or larger protect its weaker members, so
sheet will work fine. If a room or you may distribute the wandering
corridor meets the end of the monsters’ attacks like you would in
paper, that rooms end there. If a a normal combat.
room goes on the edge of the
If you are re-entering a room
paper, ignore the portion of the
occupied by a monster that you
room that would go out of the
bribed, wandering monsters may
paper. Ignore any door that
not appear in that room. Roll
connects with the edge of the
reactions for that monster. If a
paper: that room or corridor is a
bribe result is rolled again, the
dead end.
monster will ask for another bribe,
41

=== PAGE 43 ===


=== PAGE 44 ===
Four Against Darkness
and if you do not provide it, it will treasure of the final boss is tripled,
attack the party. If another result is or increased to 100 gp, whichever
rolled, the monster will let you is best for you. If it has a magic item
move through the room asking no in its treasure, you will find two
bribe. Make a note of the treasure magic items instead.
that you gave the monster; you
Killing the final boss and moving
may always change your mind
out of the dungeon ends the
later, and choose to attack the
adventure, but if you have a Quest
bribed monster. If you do so, you
going on, you may wish to continue
will recover your treasure, in
until you complete the dungeon or
addition to any treasure generated
the quest, whatever happens first.
by that encounter’s treasure roll, if
If there is any unopened door in the
any.
final boss’ room, you may ignore it
or open it, as you see fit.
The Final Boss
Unless you are playing a ready-to-
Time Limits
run adventure, your default
You may set yourself a real time
mission is to slay the dungeon’s
limit, such as, “I’ll play for 45
final boss. Each time you meet a
minutes and then I will
boss monster, roll d6, and add +1
automatically meet a final boss in
for every boss monster that you
the last room that I generate, I’ll
have already encountered in this
fight that battle, trace my way back
game (including any creature from
to the exit and call the game.”
the weird monsters table). If you
roll 6 or better, you meet the final
Let’s Get Outta Here!
boss. Keep a tall of the bosses you
have encountered in the Killing the final boss and taking its
appropriate box on the play sheet. gold is not enough. You actually
have to make it out of the dungeon
When you run out of doors to open,
alive! The characters will be
the last room you generate will
exhausted, wounded, and
automatically contain a final boss
(hopefully) slowed by the caskets
monster. The final boss has one
of gold that they are carrying, so
additional life, one additional
the monsters will try to sneak on
attack, and will automatically fight
them. Roll a d6 for every room or
to the death. The gold piece
43

=== PAGE 45 ===
Four Against Darkness
corridor that you have to cross to automatically hit by any monster
get out of the dungeon, including attacking him. A comrade carrying
the first room. On a 1, wandering a dead friend will automatically be
monsters attack. in the rearguard of the marching
order (position 3 or 4). The party
Splitting the Party may carry a dead comrade out of
the dungeon by moving to the first
In certain circumstances, you may
room of the dungeon. They are
want to split the party. For
assumed to leave the body just out
example, you may want to leave a
of the dungeon, redistribute
character to guard the body of a
among themselves any treasure or
fallen comrade, or send a single
equipment that the dead comrade
character to complete a quest. In
was carrying, and they may
these cases, every time wandering
continue the adventure if they
monsters are rolled for the main
wish. If you leave treasure on your
party, roll a 1 in 6 chance of
comrade’s body, there is a 5 in 6
wandering monsters appearing
chance that it will be stolen if you
also against the characters left
leave it unguarded.
alone. Splitting the party is very
dangerous. You may want to carry a dead
comrade out of the dungeon for
Fallen Heroes
two reasons: to give him a proper
When a character loses his last life, burial or, if you can afford to spend
he slumps to the ground, mortally 1000 gp, have the local church
wounded. If a combat is still going attempt a resurrection ritual. Roll
on, a partner may still access any d6: if the result is equal to or lower
scroll, potion, vial of holy water, than the character’s level, the ritual
weapon, shield, or magic item on is successful: the character comes
the dead adventurer’s body, but to back to life and may continue to
do so the comrade must forfeit his play in the campaign. If the roll fails,
attack for that turn. If the party the money is spent, but the
withdraws from the room, one character is irremediably lost. A
adventurer may carry the body of new, 1st level character must be
the fallen comrade if you wish, but chosen to replace the dead
that character will not be able to adventurer.
make Defense rolls and will be
44

=== PAGE 46 ===
Four Against Darkness
Leveling Up player rolls d6, scores a 5, so
Dollom levels up and
Every time the party kills a boss, becomes a 4th level wizard.
completes a quest, or survives 10 The player can now use the
encounters with minions, a second XP roll for another
character of your choice may character, since you can have
attempt to level up. This is called an a maximum of one level
experience or XP roll. Roll a die, and increase per encounter on a
if the result is higher than the character. If Rollom’s XP roll
character’s current level, the had failed, the player could
character gains a level. If you slay a have used the second XP roll
dragon as the final boss monster, to attempt levelling up with
you get TWO XP rolls (but a Rollom again.
maximum of one level increase).
Abilities that allow to reroll dice, Maximum Levels
such as the halfling’s luck, may NOT
Once a character attains 5th level,
be used on XP rolls. XP rolls for
he has reached his peak and may
minions are at -1. You may not
no longer level up. Dwarves peak
attempt to level up with the same
at the 4th level. Elves and halflings
character twice in a row.
peak at the 3rd level.
Example: Dollom the 3rd level
Increasing Life with Level
wizard is in a party that
manages to kill a chaos lord. A character who gains a level gains
Since the chaos lord is a boss, one life point.
the player decides to attempt Ready-to-run campaigns may have
an XP roll for Dollom. The different rules for gaining levels,
players rolls a 3, which is not based on the plot of the adventure.
higher than Dollom’s current
In the supplement Four against
level, so Dollom remains a 3rd
Darkness: Deeper Dungeons, the
level wizard.
characters have the option to take
Later in the adventure, the expert skills instead of leveling up.
party slays a dragon. The
player attempts to level up
Dollom again. Killing a
dragon gives two XP rolls. The
45

=== PAGE 47 ===
Four Against Darkness
46

=== PAGE 48 ===
Four Against Darkness
Spells wizard rolls a 5+1= 6 in total,
so (6-3)= 3 goblins are killed.
There are six basic spells in the
Lightning Bolt: This spell works
game. Blessing can be cast by
like an Attack roll. The wizards adds
wizards and clerics. All the other
his level to the roll. Against a group
spells may be cast only by wizards
of minions, the spell will kill just one
and elves. Casting a spell is an
if it hits. Against a boss, it inflicts 2
action equivalent to attacking in
life points if it hits.
combat. Spells may be cast during
Sleep: This spell works like an
a melee. A spell-caster may attack
Attack roll. It does not affect
as normal OR cast a spell, not both.
undead or dragons. The wizard
The Escape spell may be cast
adds his level to the roll. Sleep will
instead of making a Defense roll. It
defeat one boss or d6 + L minions
is the only spell that may be cast
if it hits. Monsters put to sleep
during the monsters’ turn.
count as slain.
Blessing: This spell removes a
Escape: The wizard disappears
curse from a character. A curse is a
from his current location an
game effect gained by stepping into
reappears in the first room of the
a cursed room. Blessing will also
game. This spell may be cast in lieu
remove other conditions, such as
of making a Defense roll, or it may
being turned to stone by a medusa.
be cast normally in the party’s turn.
Fireball: This spell works like an
It works automatically.
Attack roll. The wizard adds his
Protect: This spell gives +1 to a
level to the roll. Fireball does not
single character’s Defense rolls for
affect dragons (but it does affect
the whole duration of a battle.
zombie dragons). If used against
minions, the Fireball slays a a Random Spell Table (d6)
number of creatures equal to the
1 Blessing
wizard’s die roll minus the level of
2 Fireball
the minions. A minimum of one
3 Lightning bolt
creature is always slain.
4 Sleep
5 Escape
Example: A level 1 wizard
6 Protect
casts a fireball at a group of
goblins (level 3 minions). The
47

=== PAGE 49 ===
Four Against Darkness
Encounters so it makes no sense to let them
have the initiative. As described on
pp. 23-26, some monsters will flee,
When your party enters a room and
accept a bribe, or even ask you to
encounter monsters, you have two
perform a quest.
options:
If monsters take you by surprise
1) You act first and attack the
(beware of those sneaky goblins!),
monsters, OR
they will automatically act first. Roll
2) You wait and see what the
on their reactions table to
monsters will do.
determine what they do.
If you attack immediately, your
characters will perform attack rolls Marching Order
and divide them by the level of
You must decide in which order the
monsters, thus calculating how
characters are marching in the
many monsters are slain by the
dungeon. Use miniatures or
attack.
counters to represent this, or write
the marching order on the
Example: A warrior rolls a
adventure sheet simply writing a
total Attack of 7 when
number (1, 2, 3, or 4) next to the
attacking a group of goblins
character’s name. You may change
(level 3). The attack kills 2
your marching order every time
goblins (one goblin with the
you are in an empty room or
first 3 points, another goblin
corridor. You may not change your
with the other 3 points, and
marching order while fighting.
the extra point is wasted).
Marching order in corridors: A
Your characters may attack in any
corridor is large enough to allow
order you want. Only the monsters
two characters to walk side by side,
that survive, when your party turn
so a group of four characters will
ends and the monster turn begins,
have two characters in the front
get a chance to strike back at your
(places 1 and 2) and two in the rear
characters.
(places 3 and 4). A party of three
If you do not attack immediately,
characters will have two characters
the monster will go first. Roll d6 on
in the front (places 1 and 2) and one
that monster’s reaction table to
in the rear (place 3). If the party is
determine what the monsters do.
reduced to 2 characters, they both
Some monsters will always attack,
count as being in the front, but
48

=== PAGE 50 ===
Four Against Darkness
both will be attacked in the rear if When Do Monsters Attack?
surprised by wandering monsters
After all characters in the party
(see wandering monsters, p. 54).
have performed one action each
In a corridor, only characters in (attack, cast a spell, healing), it’s the
places 1 and 2 can fight, while monsters turn to attack — if any
characters in places 3 and 4 can have survived the party’s attack!
only cast spells or attack over the
The monsters do not roll dice:
heads of their friends if they have
those characters who are attacked
a bow or a sling.
make a Defense roll against the
The same restriction applies to level of the monsters. The Defense
monsters: when you encounter a roll is modified by armor, shield,
group of monsters in a corridor, and by the character’s level in the
only two of them will be able to case of rogues.
attack your characters.
Defense Roll Modifiers
Marching order in rooms:
Marching order is irrelevant when ● Light armor +1
the party enters a room. Rooms are
● Heavy Armor +2
large enough that all characters can
● Shield +1
fight. However, characters with
bows and slings may use them only ● Rogue: add the rogue’s level
on the first turn. After that, they will
● Dwarf defending against a troll
be engaged in close combat. In
or giant +1
close combat, all characters are
● Halfling defending against troll,
assumed to draw their close
giant, or ogre: add the halfling’s
combat weapons or, if they have
level
none, will fight at -2 to Attack rolls
using punches and kicks. A roll of 1 is always a failure. A roll
of 6 is always a successful defense.
Spells may be cast as normal in
Certain attacks will negate the
rooms. Spell-casters are tough
bonus from armor or shield.
enough to withstand a melee hit
Surprise attacks from wandering
and still be able to fry opponents
monsters who sneak up on the
with a Fireball.
party negate the bonus from
shields.
49

=== PAGE 51 ===
Four Against Darkness
Defense Roll Success: If the cleric. The player decides that
character rolls higher than the the three goblins attack the
monster’s level, or if he rolls a two warriors and the cleric.
natural (unmodified) 6, the The wizard hides behind his
character takes no damage from friends and is not attacked.
the attack.
In a room with as many
Defense Roll Failure: if his monsters as there are
Defense roll is equal to or lower characters: Each character
than the monster’s level, of if the receives one attack.
character rolls a natural
In a room with more monsters
(unmodified) 1, the character takes
than characters: Each character
ONE wound. Mark one life off the
receives ONE attack, and you roll
character’s profile. Some powerful
randomly to distribute the extra
monsters inflict TWO wounds on a
attacks. Exception: if the monsters
successful hit, as explained in their
HATE one character class, they will
monster table.
always perform extra attacks on
that class. Trolls, goblins, and
Who is Attacked?
kobolds hate dwarves; orcs hate
Who is attacked by monsters elves; and undead hate clerics.
depends on three factors:
In a corridor: TWO monsters,
1) Number of monsters; maximum, will attack the two
characters in the front (places 1
2) Your marching order;
and 2 of the marching order).
3) Whether you are in a room or a
A single character in a corridor will
corridor.
be attacked by two monsters.
In a rooms withfewer monsters
Dragon breath will hit all characters
than characters: Each monster
in a corridor or room.
MUST attack a different character.
The marching order is ignored. If Wandering monsters in a corridor
there are not enough monsters to will sneak upon the party. Up to
attack all of the characters, you two monsters will attack the two
decide which character is not characters in the rear! The
attacked. characters are surprised and they
do not get the Defense bonus from
Example: three goblins fight
a shield on this first attack.
two warriors, a wizard, and a
50

=== PAGE 52 ===
Four Against Darkness
51

=== PAGE 53 ===
Four Against Darkness
Running Away From Combat characters who are hated by the
monsters (trolls and goblins hate
Sometimes, your party will be so
dwarves, orcs hate elves, undead
beat up that you might want to run
hate clerics).
away from an overwhelming
opposition. There are two options: If none of the above conditions
Withdrawal and Flight. apply, randomize the attacks.
Withdrawal: Your party slowly If a character is killed while running
retreats to any room at its back, away, his equipment and treasure
slamming the door shut and remains in the room and may not
leaving the monsters on the other be redistributed to the other
side. Make a note of where the members of the party. Mark the
monsters are. They will still be room on your map. You’ll have to
there if you enter that room again! re-enter into that room and fight
Withdrawal is possible only when the monsters to recover the spoils
characters have a door to slam shut of war.
between themselves and the
monsters. If the room has an When Monsters Flee
opening, withdrawal is not possible.
Sometimes, monster will run away
During a withdrawal, the monsters from a combat, due to a failed
get to strike ONCE at the morale roll or some other game
characters, but the characters have effect. When this happens, each
+1 on their Defense rolls. character may perform one attack
at +1 at a fleeing monster. In most
Flight: The party runs away. As they
cases, you may ignore this rule, as
do so, each monster will attack
it will not make any difference: the
once. Each character must make a
fleeing monsters count as defeated
Defense roll. The bonus from
and you get their gold anyway.
shields does not apply in this case.
If there are enough monsters to
When Does a Combat End?
attack all characters, every
character receives one attack. If A combat ends when:
there are fewer monsters than 1) All monsters in the room have
fleeing characters, the attacks will been killed;
be directed first against the
2) All monsters have fled;
character or characters who have
lost more life points, then against 3) All characters have been killed;
52

=== PAGE 54 ===
Four Against Darkness
4) The party decides to break off Wandering monsters never have
from combat, as explained above. any treasure.
Until the combat ends, a character
Carrying Loot
may not perform any other action
than attacking, defending, casting Characters may carry any number
a spell, breaking away from of gems, jewelry, scrolls, magic
combat, or any other action wands, vials of holy water, and
allowed by the description of the potions. Each character may carry
room the party is exploring, by the a maximum of 200 gold pieces, two
description of the monster, or by a shields (one strapped on the back
magic item. For example, your and one used), three weapons (a
rogue may not disarm a trap or magic staff counts as a weapon,
search the room while the rest of and a two-handed weapon counts
the party is busy fighting. as two weapons). Characters
carrying more than this have -1 on
Looting their Defense rolls.
When your party defeats all the
monsters in a room, make a roll on Searching Rooms
the treasure table. Some monsters
have more treasure than others, All dungeons have secrets.
some have a Treasure roll modifier Whenever an empty room is
(for example, if the monster’s generated, you may decide that it
profile says “Treasure -1”, you roll is not the case, and roll on the table
at -1 on the table). Some monsters below. A halfling may use a luck
do not have treasure at all. You point to reroll. A room may be
make one roll per encounter, NOT searched only once. Mark it with an
one roll per monster. Roll for “S” when you search it. When
treasure even if the monsters flee. searching in corridors, roll at -1,
Distribute looted treasure as you
see fit among your characters. Empty Room Search Table (d6)
However, barbarians may not be
1 Wandering monsters attack!
assigned magic items (they won’t
2-4 Room is empty
use them, and they won’t even
carry them!) Clue, secret door, or hidden
5–6
treasure
53

=== PAGE 55 ===
Four Against Darkness
Wandering Monsters then against the character/s with
the lowest current Life Point total
Wandering monsters are the
(roll randomly if more characters
security guards of the dungeon.
have the same life point total).
They roam about, using secret
passages or hiding in the shadows All wandering monsters roll morale
until foolhardy adventurers pass when the situation calls for it,
by. When the rules call for unless they are a monster type that
wandering monsters, roll d6 to never tests morale.
determine what type of monsters
are attracted: Secret Door
1-2 roll on the vermin table You found a secret door or
3-4 roll on the minions table passage! Draw a door on one side
5 roll on the weird monsters table of the current room or corridor,
and roll another random room that
6 roll on the boss monster table.
Reroll any dragon. A wandering connects with it. You may spy in the
monster may NOT be the final room and determine its content
boss.
BEFORE stepping into it, and you
A ready-to-run adventure will have may decide to leave it alone if the
its own wandering monsters tables, danger seems too much for the
appropriate to the scenario. party.
Wandering monsters sneak on the If you find any treasure behind a
party and automatically attack first secret door, its gold piece value is
on the first turn of combat. doubled.
Characters may not use their If you decide to enter the secret
shield bonus on their first Defense room, any monsters in the room
roll against wandering monsters. If will be surprised. Reduce their level
you are in a corridor, the wandering by one (to a minimum of 1) in the
monsters will attack the two first turn of the ensuing combat.
rearmost characters. If you are in a
When you find a secret door, roll a
room, and there are enough
die. On a 6, congratulations! You
wandering monsters to attack all
have found a safe shortcut out of
characters, all characters will be
the dungeon. You can exit the
attacked by at least one monster,
dungeon by reaching this room at
with extra attacks going against
any time.
hated character types first, and
54

=== PAGE 56 ===
Four Against Darkness
Hidden Treasure Weakness of a monster: When
you meet a boss monster of your
Searching the room yields a lucky
choice, you have a +2 to attack that
find. A loose brick or floorboard
monster. The bonus lasts for the
hides 3d6 x 3d6 gold pieces.
whole duration of the combat, not
However, there is no such thing as
for a single attack. All characters in
a free lunch! Before determining
the party enjoy the bonus.
the amount of gold found, roll on
the Hidden Treasure Complication Deal with a monster: When you
table below: encounter a monster, you may
declare that you have a deal with
Clues the creature. The monster will let
your party pass through the room
A character found a clue for
without attacking you any time that
something big. Write CLUE on the
you need to. You may not, however,
character’s sheet. When the
take the monster’s treasure. You
character has three clues (gained
may not use this rule with vermin
during the current adventure, or
or with the final boss.
over the course of a campaign),
your character has discovered a Location of a secret treasure:
major secret. The character when you enter any empty room
immediately makes one xp roll, (not the first room of a dungeon),
gaining a level if he succeeds, and you recognize it as the location of
chooses one of the following game a hidden treasure that can be
effects to represent the secret he revealed by speaking the correct
discovered:
Hidden Treasure Complication (d6)
1–2 An alarm goes off, attracting wandering monsters to the room!
The gold is protected by a trap. The trap’s level is equal to the number
you rolled on this table (3, 4, or 5). A rogue may try to disarm the trap.
3–5
If you have no rogue, the trap attacks a random adventurer, inflicting 1
wound if he fails to save, and 2 wounds if he rolls a 1.
A ghost (level d3+1) protects the gold. A cleric may try to ban the ghost
(roll d6 plus the cleric’s level; the ghost is destroyed if the cleric rolls a
6 number equal to the ghost’s level or better). If there is no cleric in the
party, or if the cleric fails to ban the ghost, all characters lose 1 life, and
then the ghost disappears.
55

=== PAGE 57 ===
Four Against Darkness
password. A niche opens in a wall, times that you can use a single
and you find 3d6 x 10 gold pieces. specific spell, or the healing ability,
during an adventure.
Location of a magic item: When
you enter any room in a dungeon Location of a scroll: A character
(but not the starting room), you will who normally cannot cast spells
recognize it as the location of a (but not a barbarian) can take this.
hidden magic item that can be You find a scroll with a spell of your
revealed by speaking the correct choice hidden in a niche in the
password. You immediately gain dungeon.
one magic item from the random
Recipe for a potion: You have to
magic items table.
kill at least two boss monsters and
True name of a spiritual entity: spend 50 gold pieces for the
You are in contact with an angel or material components of the potion.
demon (your choice, but once After you have accomplished this,
chosen, it cannot be changed). you may purchase a potion of
During a game, you may call an healing before every adventure, at
angel to heal a single character to the cost of 50 gp. You are assumed
full health or to rescue him out of to have hired an apprentice
a trapdoor; alternatively, you may alchemist at home. The apprentice
call a demon to inflict 4 life points brews a new potion for you that is
of damage to a single creature or ready when you begin a new
to automatically kill up to 6 adventure.
minions. Once used, this power is
Terrifying secret: Whenever a
lost forever and may not be gained
monster or group of minions must
again by the same character in the
make a morale roll in your
same campaign.
presence, you may utter the
New spell: Only an elf or wizard unspeakable secret, and the
may take this. Add a spell to your monster/s will automatically fail
repertoire. their morale roll. This has no effect
on monsters that do not test
Secret to increase magical or
morale or the final boss.
spiritual power: This can be taken
by a cleric, wizard, or elf, and only Someone will pay big money for
once per character in a campaign. that: You know a nobleman who
You increase by 1 the number of lost an heirloom or a jewel. If you
56

=== PAGE 58 ===
Four Against Darkness
find a jewel, gem, or any item of free. An adventurer rolling to free
jewelry with a gold piece value, and the prisoner may not attack the
you manage to carry it out of the monsters that turn.
dungeon, you can sell it for THREE
You descend from a bloodline of
TIMES its stated value.
dragon-slayers: Only a barbarian
Your enemy is in the dungeon: A or a dwarf may take this. From now
chaos lord has done something on, when that character fights a
terrible to your character, and you dragon, you add +1 to your
know he’s been plotting and Defense and to your Attack rolls.
scheming to hurt you. When you
Secret diet: You learn a secret diet
meet a boss monster, you may
to increase your stamina. You may
change it with a chaos lord, and
not share it with your friends. As
fight against him with a +1 to your
long as you spend 100 gold in food
attack rolls. The bonus lasts for the
prior to each adventure, you will
duration of the combat.
have one extra life point until the
Someone has been imprisoned: end of the adventure. The diet is
An important character (prince, not magical and can be used by
noble, rich merchant, etc.) is a barbarians. Halflings need to spend
prisoner in the dungeon. You may only 50 gold because they have
meet him in any room guarded by access to excellent food already!
minions or by a boss monster. If
you manage to free him and bring Clues and Dying Characters
him out of the dungeon alive, you
Clues are discovered by a single
will receive a random magic item
character, but we can assume that
and a random treasure, OR a
he shared the clue with his
doubling of your current gold
companions. So, if the character
pieces, whatever is best for you.
dies, you may move the clue onto
The prisoner is chained to a wall.
another character’s profile.
An adventurer can break the chain
during combat by winning an attack
roll against level 4. Rogues and
barbarians add their level when
attempting to set the character
57

=== PAGE 59 ===
Four Against Darkness
58

=== PAGE 60 ===
Four Against Darkness
Traps trapdoor, losing 1 life. In addition,
it will take at least another
When a trap is found, roll on the character to help him out of the
table below to determine its type. trapdoor. If you fall in a trapdoor
and you are alone, you die.
Dart: The character targeted by
this attack must make a Defense Bear Trap: The character must roll
roll or lose 1 life. d6 trying to beat the level of the
trap. Halflings and elves roll at +1.
Poison gas: All characters must
Rogues add their level. A character
make a Defense roll, ignoring the
failing the roll has a foot caught in
bonus from shields or armor, or
the bear trap. The character loses
lose 1 life.
1 life and will have -1 to Attack and
Trapdoor: The character must roll
Defense rolls until that lost life is
d6 versus the level of the trap. Roll
recovered and his limping leg heals.
at -1 if you have light armor, and -2
A limping character will roll at -2
if you have heavy armor, and at +1
against other bear traps or
if you are a halfling or an elf.
trapdoors.
Rogues add their level. A character
failing the roll falls into the
Traps table (d6)
1 A dart (level 2) attacks a random character.
2 Poison gas (level 3) attacks all the characters.
A trapdoor (level 4) opens under the feet of
3
the character leading the marching order.
Bear trap (level 4) hitting the character
4
leading the marching order.
Spears coming out from a wall (level 5)
5
attack two random characters.
A giant stone block (level 5) falls on the last
6
character in the marching order.
59

=== PAGE 61 ===
Four Against Darkness
Spears: These are activated by the Locked Doors
first character walking past them,
and attack two random members Optional rule: Locked Doors in
of the party. A character failing his Random Dungeons: You may roll
Defense roll loses 1 life. a die for every door that appears in
a room. On a roll of 1 or 2, that door
Giant Stone: This level 5 attack
is locked. Roll d6 for the level of the
strikes the last character in the
lock. Mark a locked door with a L.
marching order. The character
You may find it tedious to roll for
must make a Defense roll or lose 2
every single door, so consider this
life. The bonus from armor counts,
an optional rule. The door will have
but the bonus from a shield does
a level, determining how hard it is
not.
to bash it down or pick the lock. You
Rogues Disarming Traps have two options:
1) Bash down the door; or
If a rogue leads the marching order,
he gets a chance to detect and 2) Use a rogue to lockpick the
disarm a trap before it can attack door.
the party. The rogue rolls d6, and
Bashing a door open: Roll a die
adds his level. If he beats the trap’s
with a character. Barbarians and
level, or rolls a 6, he notices the trap
warriors add their level. Doors are
and disarms it, or warns the rest of
normally level 3, but some sturdier
the party just in time. If he fails, of
or magical doors may be 4, 5, or
if he rolls a 1, the trap goes off as
even 6 for metal doors. If you beat
normal.
the door, the door opens. If you do
not beat the door, you may try
Some dungeons have more
again later. If you roll a 1, the noise
traps than others, so sending
attracts unwanted attention. Roll
a rogue in the front may not
for wandering monsters.
be a bad idea. Of course, you
have to be prepared to heal Bashing down a door with magic:
the rogue. Scripted dungeons A wizard may also destroy a door
will have more unusual traps with a Lightning Bolt or a Fireball
than the ones described in spell. This is automatic, but costs a
this table. The evil spell.
imagination of dungeon
Lockpicking a door: Only a rogue
builders knows no limits!
may attempt to lockpick a door.
60

=== PAGE 62 ===
Four Against Darkness
Roll a die and add the rogue’s level. health, wizards will have bonuses
If the rogue is alone in the room (no against magic and mental attacks,
friends are watching his back), roll rogues and elves will have bonuses
at -1. If the rogue beats the door’s against things that can be dodged,
level, the lock is picked and the clerics have bonuses against the
door is now open. If the rogue fails, undead, and so on. There is no one
he is unable to open the door, and class that is always better than
the door must be bashed down. others at saving rolls. It’s one of
those aspects of the game that you
will learn with experience. Saving
Save Versus…
rolls based on agility will often have
a -1 if the character is wearing
In some cases, the rules instruct
heavy armor.
you to save versus a specific attack.
The name of the attack is normally
just descriptive, what counts is the
target number. Roll a d6, adding
What’s on the
any modifiers as instructed. If you
roll the target number or better, Deeper Levels?
nothing happens. If you roll lower
than the target number, you suffer We are working on a supplement
the consequences indicated. This is for the deeper levels of a dungeon,
often the loss of 1 life, or some adding deadlier traps and
lasting inconvenience, such as monsters, more spells, special skills
being turned to stone, drowning, or for your characters, and more
being burned to ashes! treasure for you to plunder.
For example: characters are
urged to save versus level 3
poison or lose 1 life. A
character rolling a 1 or 2 will
lose one life. Characters
rolling 3 + will be fine.
Saving rolls may have modifiers. In
general, barbarians and halflings
will have bonuses against things
like poison thanks to their good
61

=== PAGE 63 ===
Four Against Darkness
Things to 5) Once you exit a dungeon, you
may not go back there (if you
Remember
go, the monsters will have
taken away all the treasure).
1) One of your characters must
6) Check a monster’s reaction roll
carry a lantern. This uses up one
description before attacking.
of his hands. If he dies,
Some encounters may benefit
somebody else must pick up the
you in other ways than just
lantern. A party without a lantern
giving you just opponents to slay
has -2 on all Attack and Defense
and treasure. The disadvantage,
rolls and may not use ranged
of course, is that by letting the
weapons. The only thing that the
monster perform a reaction roll
party can do without a lantern is
you give up your opportunity to
trace its way out of the dungeon.
attack first.
2) Characters have two hands they
7) Remember to check for the
can use. If the character holds a
monsters’ morale roll when you
two-handed weapon or a bow,
kill half the minions in an
he or she cannot hold a shield
encounter, or when a boss
or a lantern. A wizard, cleric or
loses more than half of its life.
elf need one free hand to cast a
spell. Carrying two weapons 8) Keep track of monsters killed.
does not give any advantage. A 10 minions encounters will give
character may temporarily strap you one xp roll. One major
a shield on his back to have a monster (boss or weird
free hand, but he will not gain monster) gives you one xp roll.
protection from the shield until
9) Perform Xp rolls immediately.
the shield goes back to his hand.
You may not save them for later.
Doing so during combat
Keep track of who was the last
requires forfeiting one attack.
character who leveled up,
3) Always write in pencil and keep because you cannot level up the
an eraser at hand. Lots of same character twice in a row,
information will have to be not even if he is the only
updated during the game. character alive. If you play the
game in cooperative mode, with
4) Write your characters in
multiple players running one
marching order.
character each, determine
62

=== PAGE 64 ===
Four Against Darkness
randomly who gets the xp roll, of the monster’s life points,
but do not let the same remember to take their morale
character level twice in a row. rolls, and in general remind the
player (or players) of the rules.
10) Remember that bosses lose
The players will decide the
one level when wounded to less
actions for their characters. If
than half life.
you play like this, keep the
11) Assign treasure to the character
monster’s reaction tables
that is actually carrying it. If
secret.
there is any gold, remember to
16) Adventures can be played one
assign some to the party’s
after the other like the chapters
dwarves, if any.
in a book. This kind of
12) Scrolls may be assigned to any
continued play is called a
party members but not to
campaign. In a campaign, your
barbarians. That’s not because
heroes retain the levels,
they can’t read, but because
equipment, and treasure
they mistrust and fear magic.
accumulated in the previous
13) Total party kills happen. It’s a games, thus becoming able to
fact of the adventuring life. face bigger challenges. Wounds
Choose wisely when to run are fully healed between games.
away and when to keep on
fighting.
14) Clues, if used wisely, are one of
the most versatile tricks up your
sleeve.
15) If you are an adult playing with
children, or an expert player
playing with casual or rookie
gamers, you might want to run
the game like a rules-light, no-
preparation-needed, traditional
pen-and-paper RPG. You could
be the game master and the
other participants will play the
adventurers. You will keep track
63

=== PAGE 65 ===
Four Against Darkness
Frequently Asked They are allowed to pick up such a
weapon, but it will still count as light
Questions
weapon (-1 to hit) in their hands. In
addition, since both of their hands
Can I loot the bodies of my will be occupied, they will not be
fallen comrades? able to cast spells or disarm traps if
they carry a two-handed weapon.
Yes, unless you ran away from a
room and let your comrade there.
Can I chop a troll to bits with
a crushing weapon, a sling, or
Can I exchange equipment
a bow?
between two characters?
No. You need at least a light slashing
Yes, in any situation except during a
weapon like a dagger.
combat. During a combat, two
characters wanting to exchange
When withdrawing against a
equipment must forfeit their attacks
force outnumbering the party,
to do so. Armor and shields may be
does each monster attack
exchanged only if the characters are
once or is every character
of the same build (warrior,
attacked only once?
barbarian, rogue, and cleric
Every monster attacks once. A boss
characters are all considered of the
with multiple attacks will use all of
same build, but dwarves, elves, and
its attacks against the party. If the
halflings are not, so a dwarf may
monsters outnumber the party,
wear only the armor that belonged
divide the attacks as normal. If there
to another dwarf).
are fewer monsters than characters,
Can my wizard pick up a choose which party member is not
sword? attacked, as long as you perform
attacks against characters who are
He can, but he may not use it in
hated by the monsters.
combat any better than he would
use a dagger. The sword will count
Can wizards memorize
as a light slashing weapon in his
multiple copies of the same
hands.
spell?
What about a wizard or rogue Yes. A wizard could go into a
who pick up a two-handed dungeon with three Sleep or three
sword? Fireball spells. The number of spells
64

=== PAGE 66 ===
Four Against Darkness
is NOT the number of incantations is used, or is it a separate
that the wizard knows, it is the entity?
number of total uses of any of the
No. The shield is mentioned
six spells that the wizard has
separately.
memorized.
Can you drop whatever
Can wizards exchange spells if
treasure or objects you don't
I have more than one wizard
want, so you don't go over the
in the party?
limits, and keep the ones you
No. A spell is in the character’s mind. want?
It is not a scroll of parchment that
Yes. But if later you go back to the
can be passed to a friend.
room where you dropped the object
or treasure, it will be gone.
What happens to the lantern
if the lantern bearer dies?
Cleric: are blessings and
The lantern falls to the ground but healing two separate things?
it does not go off. It may be picked
Yes, and they are equivalent to
up by another character at the end
spells in game effects, so for
of the combat. If you want, another
example if a rule says that “all spells
character may pick it up during the
are cast at -1 in this room”, that
combat, forfeiting his chance to
applies to uses of Blessing and
attack in that turn. A party without a
Healing as well. A cleric has 3
lantern has -2 on all Attack and
Blessing spells and 3 uses of the
Defense rolls and may not use ranged
Healing skill.
weapons. The only thing that the
party can do without a lantern is trace Wizards start with 3 spells and
their way out of the dungeon. So if gain 1 for each level. Does that
your lantern bearer dies, and the mean it's 2+L (=3 for a
lantern is on the floor, it is not a good beginning wizard), or 3 + L (4)?
idea to withdraw from that encounter
2+L, so a starting wizard has 3 spells.
until one of your characters has spent
one action (forfeiting one attack) to Wizards gain a spell when they
pick up the lantern. level up, but they have to
prepare them before starting
Is a shield considered "armor"
the adventure. So does that
for whenever the term armor
mean that while they are on
65

=== PAGE 67 ===
Four Against Darkness
an adventure, if they level up, explodes in a room and hits many
the don't actually gain a new targets at the same time.
spell until they start their next
Is the random spell table is just
adventure, or can you add a
for deciding what spell is on a
new one straight away when
scroll?
they level?
Yes. It is only used to determine the
They can add a spell straight away.
content of a scroll, or in any case an
It is assumed that the wizard was
adventure tells you to roll “a random
studying the spell while adventuring
spell”.
but lacked the raw mental power or
confidence to use it. As soon as the
Can healing give you more life
new spell is added, the wizard
points than you originally had?
realizes that he is ready to use the
No. If you have 5 life points, and are
new spell.
wounded to 3, and then you are
Elf: Starting equipment says healed, the maximum that you will
hand weapon, bow. But the elf have is still 5.
can't have both, as Bow is 2
What happens when a
handed?
wounded character levels up?
He can’t have both in his hands at
When you level up, you instantly add
the same time, but he can keep a
1 life point to both your CURRENT
sword in a scabbard while he uses
total and your STARTING life point
the bow, or vice versa. Changing
total. So a character who had 5 life
weapons takes one action, so the elf
points, and was wounded down to
may switch weapons even during
3, who levels up, has now 4 life, and
combat by forfeiting one attack.
if healed, can heal up to 6 points (his
Does the Lightning bolt spell original 5, plus one from the new
only kill one minion maximum level).
every time it's cast? Guess it's
The wizard class description
one to save only for bosses
states that spells found in
then, or if you really have no
adventures are added to the
one else to kill a minion?
repertoire of the wizard. What
Yes, you can visualize it as a lightning
does that mean?
bolt from the sky that hits a single
target, unlike the Fireball that
66

=== PAGE 68 ===
Four Against Darkness
In the game, there are only 6 basic very difficult for others to read
spells. Those are the most common them. If Marcus dies, you cannot
ones, and are used by all races and pass any additional spells he found
cultures. We will print additional to other wizards in the party, or to a
spells in adventures and new character created to replace
supplements. When you find one of Marcus.
those additional spells in a scroll, or
Do bosses have any treasure
maybe in a library, the wizard has
when met as wandering
the option of using it as a scroll or
monsters?
copy the spell in his spell book for
later use. The wizard does NOT gain No. You can imagine that they left
the extra spell, but when he levels the treasure in their lair.
up, he can now choose that new
Do minions and bosses met as
spell as part of the spells he knows.
wandering monsters count for
Example: Marcus the elementalist is
XP purposes?
a 2nd level wizard with 4 spells
Yes. A boss met as a wandering
chosen from the basic spell list.
monster entitles you to one xp roll
During an adventure, he finds a
if defeated. Minions met as
scroll with a new spell called Magic
wandering monsters are added to
Mist. He can now use the spell as a
your list of slain monsters.
one-time use (just like any other
scroll), but he has also the option of
Does a boss count for XP
copying the spell in his spell book. If
purposes if he runs away?
he copies the spell, the spell is
Yes. A monster who runs away
added to the list of spells that
counts as defeated, and you count
Marcus can choose. The next time
it for xp purposes.
he can add a spell (because he levels
up, or because he chooses new
spells for another adventure), he
can choose from any of the six basic
spells AND Magic Mist.
Note that the spell repertoire is
personal, as wizards are very jealous
of their spell books, and annotate
them in secret codes that make it
67

=== PAGE 69 ===
Play Sheet
Name Level: Clues:
Type Life:
Attack Roll: Defense Roll:
Abilities:
GP:
Equipment
Name Level: Clues:
Type Life:
Attack Roll: Defense Roll:
Abilities:
GP:
Equipment
Name Level: Clues:
Type Life:
Attack Roll: Defense Roll:
Abilities:
GP:
Equipment
Name Level: Clues:
Type Life:
Attack Roll: Defense Roll:
Abilities:
GP:
Equipment
Permission granted to reproduce this form for personal use

=== PAGE 70 ===
Monsters Killed
• VERMIN
•
•
•
•
•
• MINIONS
•
•
•
•
•
• BOSS MONSTERS
•
•
•
•
•
•
• WEIRD MONSTERS
•
•
•
•
Permission granted to reproduce this form for personal use

=== PAGE 71 ===
Four Against Darkness
70
Permission granted to reproduce this form for personal use

=== PAGE 72 ===
Four Against Darkness
Quick Reference Sheet
Warrior: Any weapon, armor, shield. +L to attack rolls.
Cleric: +½ L to attack rolls, +L vs undead. Light or heavy armor, shield, hand weapon, two-handed
weapon, sling. Cast Blessing 3 times per adventure. Up to 3 times per adventure, heal d6+L life.
Rogue: +L to disarm traps and defense rolls. Light armor and weapons only. May not use shield.
+L to attack rolls vs outnumbered minion.
Wizard: +L when attacking with spells, or on rolls to solve puzzles or riddles. Light weapons or
sling only. No armor or shield. 2 spells +1/L.
Barbarian: +L to attack rolls. Shield, light armor, any weapon. No heavy armor. May not use
magic items. Rage attack once per game: roll the attack die 3 times, choose best. Against a boss,
a rage attack inflicts 2 wounds.
Elf: +L to Attack rolls and spells cast. Any armor, shield. 1 spell x L per adventure, only if wearing
light armor and NOT using shield. +1 to attacks or spells vs orcs.
Dwarf: +L to Attack rolls, except with ranged weapons. +1 to Defense rolls vs trolls, ogres, and
giants. +1 to attack vs goblins. Any armor, any weapon. Smell treasure: roll d6+L, on a 6+
determine treasure before deciding whether to attack. Greed: party with 2 or more dwarves may
not bribe! Always assign at least one coin to every dwarf in the party, if possible. When selling
gems or jewelry, get 20% more.
Halfling: +L to defense rolls vs giants, trolls, and ogres. Light armor, light weapons and slings
only. No shields. L+1 luck points: spend 1 Luck to reroll a failed Attack or Defense roll, or to run
away from a combat without receiving an attack.
Attack procedure: (d6 + modifiers)/Monster level= number of minions slain. 1 is always a miss.
6 is always a hit.
Attacking a boss: d6+ modifiers= inflict 1 wound on boss if result is equal or better than level
of boss. 1 is always a miss. 6 is always a hit.
Defense procedure: roll d6, +1 if shield, +1 for light armor, +2 for heavy armor. Rogues add +L. If result is
equal to or better than monster’s L, take no damage. A roll of 1 is always a failure, a 6 is always a success.
On a failure, take damage and effects as per the monster’s description. Defense rolls during a withdrawal
are at +1. Defense Roll Modifiers: Light armor +1, Heavy Armor+2, Shield+1, Rogue: add the rogue’s level,
Dwarf defending against a troll or giant +1, Halfling defending against troll, giant, or ogre: add the halfling’s
level
Dice explosion: if a die rolls a 6, roll another d6 and add it.
Reactions: Your party may attack first (unless monster description says otherwise) OR wait to
see what the monsters will do (roll on the monster’s Reaction table if this is the case).
Retreating from a fight: Possible only if there is a door to be closed/blocked between party
and monsters. Monster get one last attack but your characters defend at +1.
Morale procedure: when minions lose more than half their number, or boss loses more than
half its life points, roll d6. 1-3 monsters flee, 4-6 monsters fight.
Permission granted to reproduce this form for personal use
71

=== PAGE 73 ===
Four Against Darkness
Room Contents Table (2d6)
2 Treasure found: roll on the Treasure table.
3 Treasure protected by a trap. Roll on the Traps table and on the Treasure table.
4 If corridor, empty. Otherwise, roll on the Special Events table.
5 Empty, but roll on the Special Feature table.
6 Roll on the Vermin table.
7 Roll on the Minions table
8 If corridor, empty. Otherwise, roll on the Minions table.
9 Empty.
10 If corridor, empty. Otherwise, roll on Weird Monsters table.
Roll on the Boss table. Then roll d6. Add +1 for every boss or weird monster that you
11 have encountered so far in the game. if your total is 6+, or if the dungeon layout is
complete, this is the final boss.
Empty if corridor. Otherwise, the room is a small dragon’s lair (see the Boss table for
12
dragon rules). The small dragon counts as a boss and may be the final boss.
Special Feature table (d6)
Fountain: All wounded characters recover 1 Life the first time they encounter a fountain
1
in an adventure. Further fountains have no effect.
BlessedTemple: A character of your choice gains a +1 on Attack against undead
2 monsters or demons. As soon as the character kills at least one undead or demon, the
bonus is gone.
Armory: All characters can change their weapons if they want, within the limits of the
weapons allowed to their character type. For example, a Warrior who was using a sword
3
and shield may discard his shield and take a two-handed weapon, or exchange his sword
for a mace.
CursedAltar: As you enter the room, an eerie glow emanates from a sinister altar. A
random character is cursed and has now -1 on his Defense rolls. To break the curse, the
4
character must either slay a boss monster alone, or enter a Blessed Temple (see 2, above),
or have a Blessing spell cast on himself by a cleric.
Statue: you may leave the statue alone or touch it. If you touch it, roll d6. On a 1–3, the
statue awakens and attacks your party (level 4 boss with 6 life points, immune to all spells;
5
if you defeat it, you find 3d6 x 10 gold pieces inside). On a 4-6, the statue breaks, and you
find 3d6 x 10 gold pieces inside.
PuzzleRoom: the room contains a puzzle box. Its level is d6. You may leave it alone or try
to solve it. For every failed attempt, the character trying to solve it loses 1 life. Wizards and
6
rogues add their level to their puzzle-solving roll. If the puzzle is solved, the box opens:
make a Treasure roll to determine its contents.
Traps table (d6)
1 A dart (level 2) attacks a random character.
2 Poison gas (level 3) attacks all the characters.
3 A trapdoor (level 4) opens under the feet of the character leading the marching order.
4 Bear trap (level 4) hitting the character leading the marching order.
5 Spears coming out from a wall (level 5) attack two random characters.
6 A giant stone block (level 5) falls on the last character in the marching order.
72

=== PAGE 74 ===
Four Against Darkness
Special Events table (d6)
A ghost passes through the party. All characters must save versus level 4 fear or lose 1 life. A
1
cleric adds his level to this roll.
Wandering monsters attack the party. Roll d6: 1-3 roll on the vermin table, 4 roll on the minions
2 table, 5 roll on the weird monsters table, 6 roll on the boss table. Reroll any small dragons. A boss
monster met as a wandering monster has no chance of being the final boss.
A lady in white appears and asks you to complete a quest. If you accept, roll on the Quest table.
3
If you refuse, she disappears. Ignore any further appearances of the Lady in White in the game.
4 Trap! Roll on the traps table.
You meet a wandering healer. He will heal your party at the cost of 10 gold pieces per life
5 healed. You may heal as many life points as you can afford. You can meet the healer only once
per game. If you meet him again, reroll this result.
You meet a wandering alchemist. He will sell you up to one potion of healing per party member
(50 gp each) or a single dose of blade poison (30 gp). The potion of healing will heal all lost life
points to a single character, and can be swallowed at any moment during the game as a free
6 action. The blade poison lets you envenom a single arrow or slashing weapon (not a crushing
weapon). That weapon will have a +1 on Attack against the first enemy you fight. Poison will not
work on undead monsters, demons, blobs, automatons, or living statues. You can meet a
wandering alchemist only once per game. If you meet him again, treat this result as a trap.
Treasure table (d6)
0 or less No treasure found
1 d6 gold pieces
2 2d6 gold pieces
3 A scroll with a random spell
4 One gem worth 2d6 x 5 gold pieces
5 One item of jewelry worth 3d6 x 10 gold pieces
6 or more One random magic item from the Magic Treasure table below.
Magic Treasure table (d6)
Wandof Sleep: allows to cast Sleep 3 times before it is depleted. Only wizards and elves may
1
use it. Add the user’s level to the spell roll.
Ring of Teleportation: allows user to automatically pass a Defense roll by moving that
character out of the room. That character may not take part in the current combat, but
2
rejoins the party as soon as the combat is over. After one use, the ring loses its powers and
becomes a simple golden ring worth 1d6+1 gold pieces.
FoolsGold. These magical (but fake) gold pieces will let the user automatically bribe the next
3 monster that asks for a bribe. No matter what the monster asks, the gold will appear enough
to satisfy his greed. This is a one-use magic item.
Magic Weapon. Gives +1 to its user’s Attack rolls. This is a permanent magic item. Roll d6 to
4 determine its type: 1 crushing light hand weapon, 2 slashing light hand weapon, 3 crushing
hand weapon, 4-5 slashing hand weapon, 6 bow.
Potion of Healing: Can be swallowed at any moment, healing all lost life to a single
5 character. This does not require an action. This is a one-use magic item, usable by all classes
except barbarians.
Fireball Staff: allows to cast Fireball spell twice, then its powers are depleted. Only wizards
6
may use it. Add the user’s level to the spell roll.
73

=== PAGE 75 ===
Four Against Darkness
Vermin table (d6)
1 3d6 rats Level 1, no treasure. Any character wounded has a 1 in 6 chance of losing 1 additional
life due to an infected wound. Reactions (d6): 1–3 flee, 4–6 fight
3d6 vampire bats, level 1, no treasure. Spells are cast at -1 due to their distracting shrieking.
2
Reactions (d6): 1–3 flee, 4–6 fight
2d6 goblin swarmlings, level 3, treasure -1, morale -1. Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-3 flee if
3
outnumbered, 4 bribe (5 gp x goblin), 5–6 fight.
D6 giant centipedes, level 3, no treasure. Any character wounded by a giant centipede must
4 save versus level 2 poison or lose 1 additional life. Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-3 flee if outnumbered,
4-6 fight.
5 D6 vampire frogs, level 4, treasure -1. Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-4 fight, 5-6 fight to the death
2d6 skeletal rats, level 3 undead, no treasure. Crushing weapon attacks are at +1 against
6
skeletal rats, but they cannot be attacked by bows and slings. Reactions (d6): 1-2 flee, 3-6 fight
Minions table (d6)
D6+2 skeletons or d6 zombies (50% chance of each). Level 3 undead. No treasure. Crushing
1 weapons attack Skeletons at +1. Arrows are at -1 against both skeletons and zombies. Skeletons
and zombies never test morale. Reactions: always fight to the death.
d6+3 goblins. Level 3, treasure -1. Goblins have a 1 in 6 chance of gaining surprise, thus acting
2 before the party. If they do act before the party, roll d6 on their reactions table below. Reactions
(d6): 1 flee if outnumbered, 2-3 bribe (5 gp per goblin), 4–6 fight.
d6 hobgoblins. Level 4, Treasure +1. Reactions (d6): 1 flee if outnumbered, 2–3 bribe (10 gp per
3
hobgoblin), 4–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
D6+1 orcs. Level 4. Orcs are afraid of magic and must test morale each time one or more is killed
by a spell. If a spell caused their number to drop below 50%, they will test morale at -1. They never
4
have magic items in their treasure: treat any rolled magic as d6 x d6 gold pieces instead. Reactions
(d6): 1-2 bribe (10 gp per orc), 3–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
d3 trolls. Level 5, Treasure: normal. Trolls regenerate, unless killed by a spell, or unless a
character uses one attack to chop an already killed troll to bits. If this does not happen, roll a die
5 for every killed troll on its next turn. On a 5 or 6, the troll will come back to life and continue to
fight. Reactions (d6): 1–2 fight, 3–6 fight to the death. If a dwarf is present in the party, trolls will
automatically fight to the death.
2d6 Fungi Folk. Level 3, Treasure: normal. Any character taking damage from the fungi folk must
6 save versus level 3 poison or lose 1 life. Halflings add their level on this save. Reactions (d6): 1-2
ask for bribe (d6 gp per fungus), 3–6 fight.
Random Spell Hidden Treasure Complication (d6)
Table (d6) 1–2 An alarm goes off, attracting wandering monsters to the room!
The gold is protected by a trap. The trap’s level is equal to the number you
1 Blessing
rolled on this table (3, 4, or 5). A rogue may try to disarm the trap. If you
3–5
2 Fireball have no rogue, the trap attacks a random adventurer, inflicting 1 wound if
he fails to save, and 2 wounds if he rolls a 1.
3 Lightning bolt
A ghost (level d3+1) protects the gold. A cleric may try to ban the ghost (roll
4 Sleep d6 plus the cleric’s level; the ghost is destroyed if the cleric rolls a number
6 equal to the ghost’s level or better). If there is no cleric in the party, or if the
5 Escape
cleric fails to ban the ghost, all characters lose 1 life, and then the ghost
6 Protect disappears.
74

=== PAGE 76 ===
Four Against Darkness
Boss table (d6)
Mummy. Level 5 undead, 4 life points, 2 attacks, treasure +2. Any character killed by a mummy
1 becomes another mummy and must be fought by the party. Mummies are attacked at +2 by the
Fireball spell. Mummies never test morale. Reactions: always fight.
Orc Brute. Level 5, 5 life points, 2 attacks, treasure +1 but may not have any magic items, treat as 2d6
2
x d6 gold pieces instead. Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (50 gp), 2–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
Ogre. Level 5, 6 life points, normal treasure. Each hit from an ogre inflicts 2 life points of damage.
3
Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (30 gp), 2–3 fight, 4–6 fight to the death.
Medusa. Level 4, 4 life points, treasure +1. All characters at the beginning of the battle must save
versus a level 4 gaze attack or be turned to stone. Petrified characters are out of the game until a
4
Blessing spell is cast on them. Rogues add half their level to this save. Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (6d6 gp),
2 quest, 3–5 fight, 6 fight to the death.
ChaosLord. Level 6, 4 life, 3 attacks, 2 treasure rolls at +1. Before the fight begins, roll d6 to
determine if the Chaos Lord has any special powers: 1–3 no powers, 4 evil eye (characters must roll 4+
or be at -1 on all defense rolls until the chaos lord is slain), 5 energy drain (any character taking a
5 wound from the chaos lord must roll 4+ or lose 1 level), 6 hellfire blast (before combat, all character
must roll 6+ or lose 2 life points; Clerics add ½ level to this roll). When you kill a chaos lord, roll a die;
on a 5 or 6 a character of your choice finds a Clue (see p. 55) Reactions (d6): 1 flee if outnumbered, 2
fight, 3–6 fight to the death.
Small Dragon. Level 6, 5 life points, 2 attacks, 3 treasure rolls at +1. On each turn of the dragon, roll
d6, on a 1 or 2 the dragon breathes fire, inflicting 1 life to all characters who fail to save versus level 6
dragon breath (each character adds ½ level, rounded down). If the dragon does not breathe, he bites
6
2 random characters. Small dragons are never met as random monsters. Reactions (d6): 1 Sleeping
(all characters can attack at +2 on their first attack), 2–3 bribe (all the gold of the party, with a
minimum of 100 gold or one magic item), 4–5 fight, 6 quest.
Weird Monsters table (d6)
Minotaur. Level 5, 4 life points, 2 attacks, normal treasure. Due to the power of his bull-rush
1 charge, the first Defense roll against a minotaur is at -1. Minotaurs hate halflings. Reactions (d6):
1-2 bribe (60 gp), 3–4 fight, 6 fight to the death.
Iron Eater. Level 3, 4 life, 3 attacks, no treasure. Defense rolls against the iron eater do not enjoy
bonus from heavy armor (shield and light armor count). If the monster hits, the character takes no
2
damage but loses his armor, shield, main weapon, or 3d6 gp, in this order. Reactions (d6): 1 flee,
2-3 bribe (d6 gp to distract the creature; you may not fool the creature with fools gold), 4-6 fight.
Chimera. Level 5, 6 life points, 3 attacks, normal treasure. On every of the chimera’s turns, roll d6.
3 On a 1 or 2 the chimera breathes fire instead of performing its multiple attacks. All characters
must save versus level 4 fire or lose 1 life. Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (50 gp), 2–6 fight.
Catoblepas. Level 4, 4 life points, treasure +1. All characters at the beginning of the battle must
4
save versus a level 4 gaze attack or lose 1 life. Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-6 fight
Giant Spider. Level 5, 3 life, 2 attacks, 2 treasure rolls. Characters taking a wound must save
5 versus level 3 poison or lose an additional life. Due to the spider’s webbing, the party may not
withdraw from this fight unless they cast a Fireball spell to burn the webs. Reactions: always fight.
Invisible Gremlins. A band of gremlins steal d6+3 objects from the party. You must surrender
objects from any of your characters in this order of preference: magic items, scrolls, potions,
6 weapons, gems, coins (in bundles of 10 gp each). If the gremlins steal ALL of your equipment, they
will leave a thank you message that counts as a clue. The gremlins have no combat stats because
it is impossible to fight them. Encountering them gives no XP roll
75

=== PAGE 77 ===
Four Against Darkness
Quest table (d6)
Bring me his head! The creature asks the party to kill a boss monster. Roll on the boss table to
determine who. The next time the party meets a boss in a room, instead of rolling it up, you may use
1
the boss from the quest. Killing the boss and bringing its head to the creature’s room completes the
quest.
Bring me Gold! To complete the quest, the party must bring d6 x 50 worth of treasure to this room. If
2
they already have that amount available, the amount required to complete the quest is doubled.
I want him alive! As 1, above, but the party must subdue the boss, tie him up with a rope, and take
him to the creature’s room to complete the quest. To subdue a monster, you must either use the Sleep
3
spell or fight with -1 on all Attack rolls (striking with the flat of the blade or trying to knock out the boss
instead of killing him).
Bring me that! Roll on the magic items table to determine what the object is. Every time the party kills
4 a boss, there is a 1 in 6 chance that he will have that object in addition to his treasure, if any. To
complete the quest, the party must bring the object in the room where the quest started.
Let peace be your way! To complete the quest, the party must complete at least three encounters in
the adventure in a non violent way. This includes reactions such as bribing, getting help from
5
monsters, performing another quest (not this one!), or defeating a monster with the Sleep spell and
then tying him up with a rope.
Slay all the monsters! To complete the quest, all the dungeon rooms must be laid out and all the
6 occupants slain, with the exception of the creature who sent the party on this quest. As soon as these
conditions are met, the party can claim their reward.
Epic Rewards table (d6)
The Book of Skalitos. The party is given the spell book that belonged to the legendary wizard
Skalitos. This counts as one scroll of each of the six spells. You may tear up the pages and distribute
1 the six spells among the party to use as scrolls, or leave the book as it is and assign it to only one
character. The book is old and fragile, and it is destroyed if the character carrying it is killed by dragon
breath. If unused, the book may be sold for 650 gold pieces at the end of the adventure.
The Gold of Kerrak Dar! The party is given the location of the treasure that belonged to a dwarf. As
2 soon as the party searches a room and generates at least one clue, they may use that clue to find a
hidden chest containing 500 gold pieces.
Enchanted weapon. One of the party’s weapons is enchanted and can now roll two dice for its Attack
3 rolls, choosing the best result. The weapon can also hit monsters who are hit only by magic. The
enchantment lasts until the end of the adventure.
Shield of Warning. One of the party’s shields is now enchanted and counts as protection even if the
user is surprised by wandering monsters or if the party is fleeing from a combat. If the party has no
4
shields, they will be given one. The shield of warning is permanent, and will last throughout a
campaign. It can be sold for 200 gold pieces.
Arrow of slaying. The party is given an arrow that will automatically inflict 3 wounds upon a monster.
Roll on the Boss table to determine which monster is affected by the arrow. The arrow may be used
5
only by a character with a bow. It strikes automatically against its designed monster target. Once
used, the arrow breaks. If unused, an arrow of slaying may be sold for 3d6 x 15 gold pieces.
Holy symbol of healing. The party is given a holy symbol that may be used only by a cleric. The cleric
will make all healing rolls at +2 until he dies. When the cleric dies, the holy symbol can be bought to
6 the cleric’s church. If the symbol and the body of the slain cleric are delivered to the church, an
attempt to resurrect that cleric will be paid by the church. If unused, the holy symbol can be sold for
700 gold pieces.
76

