=== PAGE 1 ===
Guidelines for a more sandbox approach for
Four Against Darkness
Heik
February 29, 2024
Introduction
This document consists of a collection of guidelines designed for playing Four
Against Darkness in sandbox mode. It relies on several official supplements (see
Section 1 for an exhaustive list). Remember that none of the rules presented in
this document are set in stone; feel free to add/remove/adapt any element that
you wish. Furthermore, I may add in the future additional rules, depending on
the supplements I end up buying.
Important initialisms
CF Chaos Factor - This is a concept borrowed from Mythic GM Emulator. The
chaos factor (or CF) is an integer between 1 and 9 which translates how
much your characters are in control of the situation. The higher it is, the
more likely dichotomous questions (questions whose answer is either yes or
no) will give a “yes” answer, and the more likely random events will occur.
Its default value is 5, and it is incremented or decremented by 1 at the end of
each important scene. You do not need to own the Mythic GM Emulator to
use this set of rules, but you may assign a CF to your adventure to influence
the odds of several outcomes.
xDy This means rolling x, y-sided di(c)e, and adding the score of each die to-
gether. For instance, 2d6 means rolling two six-sided dice, and sum the
result of both dice together. Note that, for the sake of clarity, if no number
appears before the d, it means that only one die is rolled. For example, d6
means roll one six-sided die.
1

=== PAGE 2 ===
2

=== PAGE 3 ===
Part I
Wilderness
1 Hex Map
Wilderness exploration is performed on an initially empty hexagonal map. Fol-
lowing Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild suggestions, each hexagon may be of
one, and only one, of the following types (the text in parenthesis refers to the
supplement(s) used for that type of hexagon):
⋆ Plain (Four Against Darkness core rulebook, Fiendish Foes, & Tales from
the Adventurers’ Guild)
⋆ Abyss (Four Against the Abyss)
⋆ Forest (The Crucible of Classic Critters)
⋆ Hill (Caverns of Chaos)
⋆ Mountain (More Mountainous Mayhem)
⋆ Necromantic (Digressions of the Devouring Dead)
⋆ Ruins (Ravagers of Ruins)
⋆ Temple (Lost Temples of Qaarra)
⋆ Settlement (Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild, Treacheries of the Trouble-
some Towns)
You start your campaign with a blank hexagonal grid. It will be filled gradually
with terrains and dungeons while exploring. At the beginning, use the rules pre-
sented in Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild: draw a settlement roughly at the
center of your map, and assign it a name as well as a settlement score. Thereafter,
determine the location of a couple of other settlements, still using Tales from the
Adventurers’ Guild.
One hexagon corresponds to one full day of travel. When stepping into an
unexplored hexagon, roll d6 to determine its type:
3

=== PAGE 4 ===
d6 Type
1−5 Plain
6 Special
If a 6 is rolled, this means that there is some other type of terrain or structure
nearby. Roll on the special terrain table:
d12 Special Terrain
1−3 Forest
4−5 Hill
6−7 Mountain
8 Necromantic
9 Temple
10 Abyss
11 Ruins
12 Settlement
The table above is an example; feel free to adapt the odds of this table to your
campaign and to your supplements. You can even use the CF to weight the odds
of some results:
Example 1 You own Four Against Darkness base book, the Twisted supplements,
as well as Four Against the Abyss. Besides, you own Treacheries of the Trouble-
some Towns, so may want to emphasize the occurrence of settlements. Hence,
your special terrain table may look like this:
d8 Adapted Special Terrain
1−3 Twisted Minions
4−5 Twisted Final Fights
6−7 Settlement
8 Settlement if CF ≤ 7. Otherwise, Abyss
• If Forest, Hill or Mountain is rolled, then roll another d6: the result will
give the number of hexagons taken spatially by this terrain type, as a cluster.
The “explosive six rule” is applicable there, meaning that large portions of the
mentioned terrains could be present on the map.
Example 2 You step into an unexplored hexagon: you roll d6 to determine its
type. You roll a 6, meaning that the terrain is of special type. You roll on the
Special terrain table and you obtain a 2: Forest. Hence, roll d6 to know how many
hexagons the forest stretches. You get a 6! The “explosive six rule” is applicable,
4

=== PAGE 5 ===
so you reroll and get a 3. Thus, your forest will spread on 9 hexes, one of them
including the hexagon you just stepped in. Draw forests on 9 hexes such that there
is no discontinuity in the cluster.
Why not checking the terrain type hex by hex for Forests, Hills and Mountains?
⇒ This is because it can lead to wide forest, hill and mountain areas, rather than
having one hex here and there of these types.
• If Abyss, Necromantic, Ruins or Temple is rolled, then the hexagon contains
exactly one dungeon of the rolled type.
• If Settlement is rolled, determine its name and its score. See Part III for
more information.
• If the hexagon is of type Plain, then roll d6 to determine whether dungeon(s)
is/are present there:
d6 Type
1−3 No dungeon
4−5 1 dungeon
6 2 dungeons
For each dungeon in a Plain hexagon, roll d6: if a 6 is rolled, this is a small the-
matic dungeon, like the ones from Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild. Otherwise,
use Four Against Darkness core rulebook if your party is level 1 − 2, Fiendish
Foes if your party is level 3−5. For higher levels, you may use Four Against the
Abyss and Four Against the Forsaken Depths; replace Four Against the Abyss in
the Special Terrain table by Digressions of the Devouring Dead.
After determining the terrain type of an hexagon, and eventually whether it
contains dungeons, draw on your hexagon illustrations to show that you explored
that hex, and to recall the terrain type. Be creative! Clusters of trees for forests,
snowy mountains for moutains, for settlements the drawing may vary from a ham-
let to a big town depending on the settlement score, cave entrances for dungeons
(do not forget to draw two if you ended up with two dungeons on that hex), and
so on. If you feel artistic, use coloured pencil. If you just want to go straight to
the point, just a tree and a rough cavern entrance will be sufficient.
5

=== PAGE 6 ===
2 Survival in a Wilderness Environment
The wilderness is dangerous, and settlements are a privileged location for your
party to rest and to resupply. For the sake of immersion, you may keep track of
your resources to emphasize the exploration and survival aspects.
Example 3 A non-exhaustive list of resources to track while exploring:
• Ammunitions (arrows, stones...)
• Rations
• Spells
• Torches / Oil (if you want a more hardcore, OSR experience)
2.1 Eating
Since one hexagon corresponds to one full day of travel, one ration should be
consumed per character, per hexagon. If a character does not consume a ration,
he/she may receive a small, but cumulative penalty. This could be for example a
−1 to attack, starting from the day after a ration is not consumed. Each subse-
quent day, roll d6; if the result is 1, then the penalty is decreased by an additional
1. Note that the penalty cannot exceed the character level. For example, a level
3 character cannot have less than a −3 penalty. We recall that from The Crucible
of Classic Critters, a food ration costs 1 gp, and that a character may carry up
to 10 at a time.
2.2 Resting
The only way to restore all lost hit points and spells at once, is to spend the night
in a settlement. If the party sleeps in the wilderness, the following rules apply:
• Check once per hex, at nighttime, for wandering monsters: 1 in 6 chance. You
may use the monsters from the Tales from the Adventurers’ Guildsupplement.
• If wandering monsters are checked, they automatically attack and surprise the
party; do not attack first. Furthermore, no hit point or spell is recovered during
that night.
• If no wandering monsters attack the party during the night, each character heals
one hit point, and casters recover one spell.
If you find this rule too harsh, you may decrease the odds of having wandering
6

=== PAGE 7 ===
monsters (1 in 12 instead), or even have various odds depending on the terrain
type. The characters could also recover 2 hit points instead of 1.
Part II
Dungeons
3 Twisted Supplements
• The Twisted Dungeons supplement gives a short description for dungeons, and
it may be rolled at the beginning of regular dungeons. It adds both narrative
and mechanical twists when used. I suggest using that supplement for any non-
thematic dungeon. It will emphasize the narrative, but also, it might influence
the questions asked to your oracle (if using any) while diving into the dungeon.
• The Twisted Final Fights gives interesting final bosses in the dungeons. I sug-
gest rolling d6 when a final boss is about to be faced, and on a 1, use Twisted
Final Fights instead of the boss table of the current book you are using.
• The Twisted Hoards supplement gives new interesting treasures. I suggest to
roll d6 when you loot a magic object; on a 6, use the Twisted Hoards supplement
instead of the magic table of the current book you are using.
• The Twisted Minions supplement adds a twist to regular minions. Since min-
ions are a very common type of monster, I scaled the odds of appearance based
on the Chaos Factor CF. The Twisted Minions supplement is used only if the
corresponding Room Content Roll (RCR) pair associated with the current CF is
rolled. Feel free to ignore the following table if that is too much work:
CF RCR
1−3 (1,6), (6,1)
4−6 (1,6), (6,1), (2,6), (6,2)
7−9 (1,6), (6,1), (4,4), (2,6), (6,2)
7

=== PAGE 8 ===
4 Scrolls
Many supplements contain additional spells from the base book. When a scroll is
dropped, roll on the following table to determine which spell it is:
Spell Table
Each number corresponds to a spell in the base book
1−6
spell table
7−8 Roll on your Special spell table
If 7 or 8 is rolled, then roll on a “Special Spell” table you made, containing all
the spells from the supplements you own.
Part III
Settlements
With the new Treacheries of the Troublesome Towns supplements, you will prob-
ably have more than enough to handle towns. Otherwise, there exists plenty of
tools used for solo RPGs that you could use. For example, “UNE” (Universal
NPC Emulator) is a free resource to shape NPCs. Or you could use the random
tables from the free TTRPG system entitled “Heroes of Adventure”. The latter
contains a random mission generator, which is perfect when having a sandbox
approach. Additionally, Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild contains several ac-
tivities to do in town, such as looking for rumors, and even some small narrative
bits!
• Missions: Many missions are scattered throughout Four Against Darkness
supplements. Some of them may be used for any adventure type, but some are
restricted to thematic settings and even characters level.
• Recruiting: All the classes from the supplements do not have to be avail-
able anytime and anywhere. I suggest to be able to recruit new party members
in town only. Moreover, if you want to spice things up, after each adventure,
while being in town, one can recruit as many “base” classes (from Four Against
Darkness base rulebook) as we want. An Elder or Wilderness Guide (see Con-
cise Collection of Classes) could be there. One or more random - non elder,
8

=== PAGE 9 ===
non wilderness guide - class(es) from Concise Collection of Classes, subject to an
availability roll could be recruited as well. But any more “special” classes, such as
a Necromancer, Crystalmancer... could become available only after having visited
the related thematic dungeons.
A Additional House Rules
The wizard (and any spellcasting class with similar spells than the wizard) starts
at level one knowing a random combination of spells. To keep it simple, roll d6
for each one of the 6 base spells; on 1 − 3, your spellcaster will not know that
spell; on a 4−6, your spellcaster will know that spell. Obviously, the character
should know at least one spell; reroll if you got 0 spell.
Thatmethodisinterestingforseveralreasons: thefirstoneistopreparespellsthat
one would have not prepared. The second one is to create excitement; dropping
a scroll from a base spell is exciting if your character does not know that spell, as
he/she can learn it from the spell.
B Important rules
⋆ Trolls, goblins and kobolds hate dwarves. Orcs hate elves. Undead hate
clerics.
⋆ Ifmonstersrunawayfromreaction, noXPisearned. Butifitisfrommorale
check, XP is earned.
⋆ XP rolls is at −1 for minions. Track each group of minions.
⋆ When using a bow, the character attacks first, even when monsters act
before the party. Then, the character needs to spend one turn switching
to close combat (except if corridor). The bow cannot be used afterward
(except corridor).
⋆ Spellcasters such as elf, wizard and cleric need one free hand to cast a spell.
⋆ Corridor: only characters in position 1 and 2 can attack. The same applies
to monsters.
⋆ Wandering monsters and bosses do not have treasure (FAQ says the con-
trary).
9

=== PAGE 10 ===
⋆ When withdrawing from a fight, if the room has already been discovered,
roll for wandering monsters. Otherwise, roll for a new room.
⋆ Fiendish Foes: vermins count as minions in terms of XP track.
10

