=== PAGE 1 ===
Tales from the
Adventurers’ Guild
A supplement for Four Against Darkness, for All Levels
Written by Andrea Sfiligoi

=== PAGE 2 ===
Tales from the
Adventurers’ Guild
A supplement for Four Against Darkness, for All Levels
Written and illustrated by Andrea Sfiligoi
Additional art: Fat Goblin Games, Warmtail, Mikesilent, Alexandra Petruk, Midjourney.
Proofreading by Marty Costello.
With contributions by Scott Bohlmann (guild rules), Tim Cox (things to do
between adventures) and David Martin (single character rules).
Playtesting and helpful comments: Daniel Casquilho, Samuele Mariotti, Victor
Jarmusz, Erick Bouchard, Colin Pattinson, and the dungeoneers on the Four
Against Darkness Adventurer’s Guild Facebook group.
www.ganeshagames.net

=== PAGE 3 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Contents Gambling House Table 21
Introduction 1 Rumors 22
More Dice 1 Red Herring Table 23
Troupe Play 1
Rescue Parties 3 Scenes 25
Hirelings and the Troupe 3
No Lending of Equipment 3 Thematic Dungeons 38
Use All Characters 3
Home Base 4 Following the Treasure Map Table 32
The Map Leads to... 33
Settlement Size 4 Riff-Raff Table 34
Moving to a Different Settlement 4 Outside of Town Ambush Table 35
Weird Monsters Around Town Table 36
New Rules 6 Chaos Cult Table 37
Stealth Rolls 6 Theme Table 38
Stealth Modifier Summary 6 I Changed My Mind, You Didn’t Tell Me We
Using Stealth 7 Were Up Against A Dragon! 38
Who Rolls for Stealth? 8 Dragon’s Lair 39
New Expert Skill: Stealth Training 8 Dragon Type Table 39
Ghastly Mine 41
What To Do With Treasure 9 Ghastly Mine Minions Table 41
Banks 9 Ghastly Mine Major Foe Table 42
Other Characters Inheriting Bank Savings 9 Giant’s Lair 43
Magic Lockers 10 Fiendish Abyss 45
Platinum Coins 10 Minotaur Maze 46
Hidden Treasure Troves 11 Prisoner Table 45
Resurrection Tags 11 Room Shapes 46
Blessing Tags 11 Vermin 46
Gems and Jewelry 13
Minions 46
Bag of Carrying 13
Major Foes 46
Useful Equipment 14
Final Boss 46
10’ Pole 14
Lantern Hook 14 Searching 46
Very Nutritious Food 14
Wandering Monsters 46
Poison Resistance Training 15
Martial Arts Training 15 Getting Lost in the Maze 47
Gambling House 15
Special Events 47
Treasure Maps 16
Moneylenders 16 Minotaur Maze Special Event Table (d6) 47
Good Boots 17 Bandit Hideout 48
Flask of Flammable Oil 17 Take No Prisoners 49
Horn 18 Mushrooms in the Megadungeon 50
Wineskin 18 Delving Deeper and Deeper 51
Flail-Axe 18
Aspergillum 19 The Adventurers Guild 52
Guild Job Table 54
Availability Rolls 19 Minor Unique Quest Table 54
Streetwise Rules 20 Clean Up My Castle 55
Streetwise Save Modifiers 20 Gorungar the Mighty 55
Griffin Omelets, Anyone? 56
A Portrait in Red 57

=== PAGE 4 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Sewers Search 58
Monoceros Hunt 59
Sewers Vermin Table 58
Sewers Minions Table 58
Solo Mission Rules 60
Trinkets 61
Trinkets List 61
Scroll 61
Potion of Healing 61
Power Cookie 61
Enchanted Sling Bullet 62
Mist Sphere 62
Darkness Sphere 62
Candy of Hyperactivity 62
Enchanted Bauble 62
Using Trinkets in Your Campaigns 64
Trinkets Table 64
Adventurers Guild Spells 65
Speedy Recovery 65
Temporary Weapon Enchantment 65
Troupe Switch 65
Random Guild Spell Table 65
Look Tough 66
Silence of the Mouse 66
Wizard’s Luck 66
Experience Tiers Rules Summary 67
Tier Number 67
Guild Rules Summary 68
Hex Sheet 69
Sample Campaign setting: Varian Adventurers
Guild 70
The Passage of Time 70
Random Encounters 71

=== PAGE 5 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Introduction Troupe Play
This book can be used as a spring-
This supplement for Four Against
board for a Troupe Play campaign.
Darkness describes town/village
This is a special play style in which,
activities that the party may perform
instead of creating a party of four
between dungeon adventures, and
adventurers, you create a cast of
rules for joining an adventurers’
many, and then pick “the best men
guild. Characters can look for rumors,
and women for a job” for every mis-
pick up local legends, find jobs, start
sion. We recommend creating 12
quests, buy treasure maps, and so on.
characters, so you have the equivalent
The book also has plenty of new
of three parties ready, but the exact
adventuring options, thematic dun-
number is up to you. These characters
geons and guidelines for troupe play.
are created using the normal Four
This book is NOT a full system for Against the Darkness rules, and may
town adventuring or guilds. For town belong to all the character classes
adventuring, check the Treacheries published for the game, using any
of the Troublesome Towns series of supplements you own. All characters
books which give more detailed rules begin at Level 1, roll for their initial
for some things like banks that are gp, and are equipped buying any
treated more abstractly in this book. equipment available, plus their free
If you want more information about starting equipment. All additional
guilds and other organizations, check classes described in future books are
out Greedy Gifts of the Guildmasters. allowed in troupe play. You may
decide that certain classes (e.g., the
More Dice demonic or undead ones) have no
place in a guild environment, or
Tables in this book do not use only
simply decide that the guild has
d6. You will need a d10 and d12 as
created enough loopholes to allow
well. These dice are used by most
“evil” or monstrous creatures to join
traditional roleplaying games so you
the guild. It’s up to you.
may already have a set somewhere. If
Whenever one of the troupe charac-
you are new to adventure gaming,
ters dies, just create a new L1 charac-
these dice can be easily obtained in
ter at your earliest opportunity. You
game stores and from online vendors.
may find it convenient to number
There are also a lot of dice-rolling
your characters, so that if you want to
apps that can easily emulate any type
select a random character from the
of dice and are readily available for
troupe, you roll the corresponding die
all tablets and smartphones.
to select him or her. For example, if
you have a total of 12 characters
1

=== PAGE 6 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
2

=== PAGE 7 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
numbered 1 to 12, roll d12 to select you. You could have them rest or have
one. You may also decide to randomly them go looking for adventuring jobs,
roll a party composition every time. roll for rumors, purchase treasure
This will make the game more diffi- maps, gamble at the gambling house,
cult and unpredictable, but may lead drink at the inn, or perform some of
to more fun as you discover peculiar the other activities described in this
synergies between different character book. You may play these little adven-
types. tures simultaneously with the
dungeon exploration of the main
Rescue Parties party.
When one or more of your characters
No Lending of Equipment
has to be rescued from a dungeon (for
example because they have been Troupe members know each other
turned to stone by a medusa), you and cooperate, and in some cases may
may form a rescue party with other be friends, partner in crime, siblings
troupe members. The idea is that all or lovers, but they should NOT lend
of these characters belong to a guild out equipment or money to each
of adventurers that they joined for other. Dungeoneers are always on the
food, lodging, magic healing and lookout for adventure, and it is not
mutual support, so they would go to possible to have your fireball wand or
help their stranded colleagues. your purse of gold in two places at the
same time.
Hirelings and the Troupe
Use All Characters
If one of your characters buys the
service of a hireling or a professional You should ROTATE duties so that
(as detailed in Four Against the the largest number of characters get
Abyss or in additional supplements a chance of leveling up. In other
like Audacious Adversaries), the words, you should use all the charac-
service stays with the character that ters in a troupe. There are no hard
paid for it, NOT with the group. In and fast rules on how to do that: just
other words, if Melkar the wizard make sure that no character is left too
pays for a porter's services, and then far behind as the other members of
you leave Melkar home using another the troupe advance in levels.
character in the operative party, the
Remember that, because of the HCL
porter stays home too.
rule that many monsters and dangers
Characters who remain home during use, it is a wise idea to keep all char-
a dungeon adventure do not need to acters roughly at the same level.
be inoperative. What they do is up to Otherwise, low level characters in a
3

=== PAGE 8 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
party with a high level leader may be Moving to a Different
at a tremendous disadvantage when Settlement
they meet a HCL danger.
At a certain point of your campaign,
you may want to move away from the
Home Base
current settlement and generate a
The party is assumed to have a base new one. You may roll 3d6-3 (with a
of operations in a civilized settlement. minimum result of 1) to determine
This is most likely a village or a small how many days of travel are between
town where the characters go to lick the current settlement and the next.
their wounds and rest between their
The size of the next settlement is
bouts of dragon-slaying and treasure
always random. Give it a name and
hunting.
draw it on a map. You do not need any
fancy art: a circle or a dot with the
Settlement Size
settlement’s name and size is enough.
At the beginning of the campaign, Make sure the map shows how many
give the settlement a name and deter- days of travel separate it from the
mine its size. Size is indicated by a previous settlement. At any moment,
number. You can choose a number you may decide to move between one
from -3 to +3, or determine it ran- settlement and the other.
domly (roll d6, counting a 1 as a -2, a You can start using a hex map. Place
2 as a -1, a 3 as a 0, a 4 as a +1, a 5 as your first settlement roughly at the
a +2, and a 6 as a +3). center of the map. Assume that every
Larger settlements have more equip- hex represents one day of travel. If
ment available for purchase. In you want to add a new settlement,
smaller settlements, there will be less number the hexsides 1 to 6 and roll
magic available, some services may d6 to determine in which direction
be missing and some equipment may the new village is found (relative to
be unavailable. the current settlement) and roll 3d6-2
for a distance in hexes (with a
minimum distance of 1 hex). Then
roll 3d6. If the result of this roll is
higher than the distance in hexes, a
road exists between the two settle-
ments.
Example: You place your
village, Varian, at the center
of your hex sheet. You roll for
direction, getting a 1, so the
4

=== PAGE 9 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
new settlement is North. You when traveling in the wilderness,
choose the name Diram for where you would roll a 1 in 6 chance
the new village and roll 3d6 of an encounter for every hex trav-
-2. The total is 6, so Diram is eled. If you are using a different book
6 hexes North of Varian. You for adventure/hex content generation
roll 3d6, and roll a 10. This and that book has a different method
is higher than the distance in for generating random encounters,
hexes, so a road exists that book’s rules override this rule.
between Varian and Diram.
If you want, you can use this method
to generate a map with a handful of
settlements. When the roll of the dice
If there is a road, you can choose to
pushes you off the current hex sheet,
pay a tithe when moving between the
just add a new sheet of paper and
two settlements. The tithe is 1 gp for
more hexes. Feel free to expand your
every 3 hexes traveled, for the whole
world in all directions and on multi-
party. Traveling on a road is safer:
ple sheets of paper. Only you, as the
you roll for a 1 in 6 chance of having
game’s Play Master, can decide when
an encounter every 3 hexes, unlike
to stop.
5

=== PAGE 10 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
New Rules shield and -1 from the
armor), so you perform a
single roll for both using the
Stealth Rolls warrior’s modifier, -2.
Some situations in this book call for Sometimes it makes sense to send in
a Stealth roll. This is a Save per- only the most stealthy character, but
formed to determine whether a char- in some situations this also means he
acter can move without being seen or might be caught alone by the enemy.
heard.
Stealth Modifier Summary
The rules will tell you the level of the
Save, but if this is not shown, simply ● Rogues, assassins: +L
use the L of the monster upon which
● Halflings: +½ L
you are trying to skulk. Rogues add
+L due to their training, halflings add ● Rangers, wilderness scouts: +½
+1/2 L due to their small size, and L only outdoors
elves add a flat +1 bonus due to their
● Elves: +1
innate agility. All characters roll at -1
● Wood elves: +1, +½ L in forests
if wearing shields and at -1 if wearing
and jungles
heavy armor. Remember that a roll of
1 is always a failure, and use the ● Shield-carrying character: -1
normal rules for exploding dice.
● Heavy Armor: -1
The rules for the encounter will tell
● Group roll: use the WORST mod-
you what happens in case of success
ifier in the group.
or failure, but in general a successful
Stealth Save will let the character or ● Setting modifier. The setting
the party go unnoticed. where the Stealth roll is
attempted will give a modifier.
If multiple characters are trying to
Use your common sense to deter-
pass the same Stealth Save, roll for all
mine what the setting is – if your
of them together (with just one roll)
party is adventuring in a cata-
using the WORST possible modifier
comb located in a jungle, use the
in the group.
jungle modifier outside of the
catacomb, but use the catacomb
For example, a L3 rogue and
modifier once the party has
a warrior wearing shield
entered the building.
and heavy armor try to skulk
unnoticed into an orcish ● Plains or desert: -2
camp. The rogue would roll
● Valley: 0
at +3 (because she is L3) and
the warrior at -2 (-1 from the ● Light forest: +1
6

=== PAGE 11 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
● Dense forest +2 Using Stealth
● Jungle: +3 When you go into an unexplored area
● Cave: +1 and generate the room or corridor,
roll for contents using a table from
● Tomb, catacomb: +1
any book appropriate to your party’s
● Ruins: 0 level. If you encounter monsters, you
may make a Stealth Roll vs. the mon-
● Tower: -1
ster’s Level.
● Sewer: +2
If you succeed you have two options:
● On a large ship: +1
1) Quietly exit the room before the
● Fortress: 0
monsters can spot you. You travel
● Labyrinth: +1 into either a connected, unexplored
space in your current location or back
● Prison: 0
into an already explored space con-
● Halls: +1 nected to your current location (roll-
ing the usual chance of a Wandering
● Temple: 0
Monsters encounter as you do so). As
● City streets: +1
the monsters haven’t spotted you, you
must NOT perform any Defense rolls
and you may NOT cast any spells
Other terrain types will be described
except Escape or some other Telepor-
in specific adventures or supple-
tation-type spell.
ments. In some cases, lighting condi-
tions or magical surveillance systems 2) Ambush the foes, gaining sur-
will make stealth impossible. prise (reduce the foes’ L by 1, to a
minimum of 1, during the first turn
In some situations, skulking past
of the ensuing combat, and if they
guards will require you to split the
have ranged attacks, they do not get
party. For example, you could send
to shoot before the combat). Alterna-
the party’s two rogues past a couple
tively, you may slowly creep out and
of guards, hide in the shadows and
check their Reactions.
attack them by surprise. The other
party members are assumed to be one If you fail the Stealth roll, the mon-
turn away, and will be able to join the sters gain the initiative and (your
fight later (they will skip their first choice) either attack the party imme-
round of combat). diately or roll for their Reactions.
Assassins just use the normal rules for
their class.
Note: You cannot perform Stealth
Saves against Wandering Monsters,
7

=== PAGE 12 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Special Events or Traps. Also, in with a better than average chance of
general you cannot use Stealth performing a successful Stealth Save.
against any monster that has no Level The disadvantage of sending a single
or combat statistics shown. Use your character is that, if the Stealth roll
common sense: an acidic ooze that fails, the character will be alone with
“attacks” characters by seeping the foes encountered for 1 full turn,
through their shoes and eating their and any enemy attacks will have to be
flesh may not be surprised by stealth. directed at the scout.
Who Rolls for Stealth? New Expert Skill: Stealth
Training
If the whole party is advancing, you
must roll once for all the party, using This expert skill is available for all
the character with the worst Stealth characters that do not add any Level
ability, including all modifiers. bonuses to Stealth roll. Once this skill
As you can imagine, it is much easier is known, the character will be able
to send a lone scout ahead of the to add +½ L to his/her Stealth rolls.
party. Generally this will be a hal-
fling, wilderness scout, assassin or
rogue – in other words, a character
8

=== PAGE 13 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
What To Do With ment. The bank account must be in
the name of a single character.
Treasure
After every dungeon adventure in
which at least one of your characters
The official, admittedly simplistic
leveled up, roll 3d6. If you roll a 3,
encumbrance rule is that a character
the bank is robbed and you lose all
can carry his/her weapons, armor,
your money. If you roll an 18, you
food and up to 200 gp of treasure in
gain 10%. Nothing happens on any
coins. If more than that is carried, the
other result. All the money in the
character will be encumbered and
bank is available when you need it.
will be at -1 on his/her Defense rolls.
Banks are available in any settlement
This works for the first few adven-
size (in small villages, there will not
tures. Once characters start to have
be a bank but the banking service will
plenty of gold, they will want to keep
be provided by a rich merchant or by
it somewhere, or convert it into more
the village’s elders/treasury).
portable goods, like potions, scrolls,
and gems, or to pre-paid resurrection Other Characters Inheriting
rituals. You can find here a few addi- Bank Savings
tional options. This is a list of special Banked money will be in the name of
equipment and services to buy. All of a specific character, but the party or
this is optional: if these options com- troupe may make sure that all charac-
plicate the game too much, ignore ters are set up to inherit the gold from
them, and just assume that the char- the bank if the original account owner
acters have some safe place where dies. Characters with 1 or more
they can store their treasure. These Madness points will not accept this
banking rules are abstract and simple. deal (they will suspect that their
More detailed banking rules will friends will betray them and stab
appear in Treacheries of the Trouble- them in the back to inherit their
some Towns. gold). In any case, receiving an inher-
itance incurs in a 20% taxation,
Banks rounded up. The tax is paid when the
money is passed onto another
The easiest solution for a party that
account holder.
has more treasure than they can easily
Chasing Bank Robbers
carry is to put part of their riches into
a bank. You may put in a bank coins, If your money gets stolen from a bank
gems, jewelry and magic treasure. or hidden treasure, you may search
However, this comes with a cost: you for the culprits and take it back. You
lose 10% of the total in bank fees, must spend 3 Clues to learn who stole
rounded up. This is a one time pay- the money. You may generate Clues
9

=== PAGE 14 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
with a successful Streetwise roll, use or less. You may have as many
unspent Clues from previous adven- magical lockers as you wish, but each
tures, or both. Once you spend the of them requires a separate roll to
Clues, you learn about the hideout of “summon” the goods stored in the
the bank robbers. Play the Bandit locker. If you are in combat or in any
hideout scenario (result 6 on the situation where time is of the essence,
Thematic Dungeons Table). You will using the magic locker requires 1
find your stolen money as part of the turn. The item appears in the charac-
treasure of the Final Boss encounter ter’s hands or at the character’s feet,
in the hideout. as desired. It is assumed that the
characters use this turn to speak the
Magic Lockers power word and to free their hands
from any carried items, so if desired
In size 0+ settlements, a few banks
the object held in the magic locker
run by wizards offer a service called
can appear in their hands and be
magic locker. Basically, for a single
ready for use.
payment of 50 gp, a character may
place a single item or up to 5000 gp
Platinum Coins
in coins in an enchanted locker. The
bank gives you a secret power word. In size +3 settlements, gold may be
At any moment during an adventure, converted to platinum coins. These
should you need what is in the locker, rare coins are worth 20 GP each, and
you speak the power word and roll are used by high ranking nobles and
3d6. If you roll a total of 6 or less, a governments and high level mer-
magical mishap occurs, and you may chants. One platinum piece, or PP,
not retrieve the object until you go weighs the same as one GP.
back to town and visit the bank. On a
In size +2 settlements, PP will be
total of 7 or more, however, the
accepted as currency but will not be
object or bag of valuables/coins
available to buy. In other words, you
appear in your hands wherever you
can still pay with PP, but not change
are, ready to be used. This could be
your gp to PP.
of help to keep a rare object safe, or
In settlements smaller than size +2,
even some funds, until the right
platinum pieces will be accepted only
moment to use them comes, for
for church donations (for example to
example to bribe some greedy mon-
buy a resurrection ritual or a Bless-
ster. Barbarians, beastmasters, trolls
ing). Commoners have probably
and other characters that save like
never seen a PP in their life and will
barbarians or can’t use magic at all
not accept them for payment.
may not use magic lockers. Wizards
who use a magic locker have a mishap Monsters that can be bribed with
only if the total of the 3d6 roll is a 5 money will gladly accept PP.
10

=== PAGE 15 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
If you do not want to complicate your clerics of the local temple, that shows
game with currency, ignore PP. that the character has already paid
500 gp for a resurrection ritual. If the
Hidden Treasure Troves body of a dead adventurer is carried
to a temple, the resurrection tag is
Adventurers may want to skip taxa-
removed and the ritual performed.
tion and bank fees. In this case, the
You may purchase as many resurrec-
easiest way to keep money is to hide
tion tags as desired with all charac-
it in a cache/hidden treasure chest
ters, including barbarians and other
somewhere. Only characters knowing
characters who cannot use magic. You
the location of the cache may access
may not buy a Resurrection Tag for a
it. Characters with 1 or more
character that, for any reason, may
Madness points will keep their money
not be resurrected.
separate from the money of others,
while sane characters are allowed to
Blessing Tags
keep everything in a single communal
cache. Between every adventure, roll Likewise, you can have a pendant
3d6 and add the results. On a 3, 4 or with a pre-paid Blessing (80 gp) on a
5, the cache is discovered by a trea- character. This is useful to break a
sure hunter and all the money is curse. Basically, this is just a voucher
stolen. To recover the stolen money, for a Blessing which costs less than
the party must generate 4 Clues with buying a scroll, but is tied to a specific
Streetwise rolls, and then intimidate person. You still have to carry the
the treasure hunter with a successful character back to town, but the Bless-
Interrogation Save vs. L6. On a suc- ing was already paid for, so even if
cess, all the money is recovered. On you are robbed or return from the
a failure, the character performing dungeon empty-handed, your charac-
the Interrogation Save runs into an ter will be returned to full health.
encounter with petty criminals (roll
A Blessing tag is cheaper than buying
on the Riff-Raff Table) and treasure
a Blessing scroll (100 gp) but can be
cannot be recovered.
used only to Bless the wearer of the
In troupe play, you can assume that tag. You can assume that all charac-
all characters in the troupe know ters in a troupe know which charac-
where the cache is hidden. ters have blessing tags on them.
Resurrection and blessing tags are
Resurrection Tags
not magical items and they will not be
stolen by invisible gremlins unless
Characters can invest money in a
you choose to let them. They are not
“resurrection tag”. This is a small
subject to an availability roll, as it is
golden pendant, issued by the good
11

=== PAGE 16 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
12

=== PAGE 17 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
assumed that the characters have weight amount inside it, including
chosen a village with a church and a large objects like swords or bows, as
good cleric for their base of opera- long as the object can fit into the bag’s
tions. opening (characters turned to stone
do not fit into the opening, unless the
Gems and Jewelry character is a small fairy, a bog fly, a
lutin, or the like). Bags of carrying are
It is also possible to make gold coins
subject to a L6 availability roll.
more portable by converting them
If a Bag of Carrying is lost or stolen,
into gems and jewelry. This causes
all of the contents are lost or stolen.
the character to lose 10% of the net
It counts as a magic item, so charac-
value, unless the buyer is a dwarf.
ters who cannot use magic will not
Example: if your wizard carry one, and invisible gremlins or
spends 100 gp on a ruby, he other creatures that steal magic items
receives a 90 gp gem. If your may steal the Bag.
dwarf does the same, he gets
a 100 gp ruby.
Gems and jewelry are considered of
negligible weight. However, if your
party is wearing a total of more than
2000 gp worth of jewelry, the gp cost
of any bribing reaction by a monster
will increase by 50%: the monsters
think you can afford to pay a higher
bribe or are just made greedier by all
the bling.
Single pieces of jewelry with a value
above 500 gp are subject to a L6
availability roll.
Bag of Carrying - 200 gp
Some magic academies sell a magic
bag called a Bag of Carrying for 200
gp. This can be a knapsack, backpack,
or even a small pouch. The magic
inside the Bag of Carrying distorts
space, so the wearer may carry ANY
13

=== PAGE 18 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Useful Equipment
Lantern Hook - 2 gp
10’ Pole - 2 gp
This metal hook is applied on a shield
This requires two hands to use, and
to hang a lantern. A character with a
counts as a light crushing weapon if
shield and a lantern hook may carry
used in melee by rogues and wizards
a lantern without using a hand to hold
and other classes limited to light
it, as long as the character is wielding
weapons; it counts as a hand weapon
the shield. During an encounter, the
if used by classes without such a
character may also spend one action
limitation, and as a two-handed
to detach the lantern from the shield
crushing weapon with the customary
and put it on the floor. If the lantern
+1 to Attack rolls if used by a monk,
is hanging from the shield and the
barbarian, or martial mystic. Carry-
shield is destroyed, roll a 3 in 6
ing a pole in the character’s hands
chance that the lantern is destroyed
gives +1 to saves vs. all traps that
too. If it is not destroyed, the lantern
target the first person to enter a room
falls on the floor and remains there
or the first person in the party’s
until a character picks it up. If the
marching order (if that person is the
lantern is destroyed, its flames will
one carrying the pole in their hands).
continue to light the room for d3
The bonus does not apply vs. traps
turns, after which the party will be in
that hit all the party members at the
darkness.
same time or that target a random
character. If a lantern is on the floor and the
party flees from a combat, the lantern
A character holding a 10-foot pole
remains on the floor unless a charac-
may reroll a result of 2-4 on a Search
ter stays for one additional turn
roll, and gets a +1 on Trap Saves
(taking an additional attack from all
against mechanical traps (if the trap
enemies in the room) and spends 1
shoots gas, darts or a ranged attack of
action to pick up the lantern before
any type, the pole gives no bonus to
fleeing.
the user). A 10-foot pole may be
purchased in any settlement for 2 gp.
Very Nutritious Food (20
A character may automatically create
gp)
a 10-foot pole from local trees in any
forested area.
By paying 20 gp per person, charac-
In dungeons, only one character at a ters may eat specially nutritious food
time may carry a 10-foot pole in that will give them an edge. Charac-
his/her hands. ters who eat this may reroll their first
14

=== PAGE 19 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
failed die roll (on any Save, Attack or missing Life point can be healed by
Defense roll) in their first combat magic during the course of the adven-
encounter after eating the specially ture, but may not be healed by ban-
nutritious food. No character may daging.
benefit from more than one reroll of
this type per adventure. 20 gp buys Martial Arts Training (25
enough specially nutritious food for
gp)
4 characters and any 5th character or
henchman in the party. Characters may pay 25 gp between
adventures to train in a martial arts
A halfling cooking a Nutritious Meal
academy. They may fight barehanded
for the party may use Very Nutritious
at -1 instead of -2 during their next
food for the meal, cumulating both
adventure. The advantage disappears
effects.
if they do not train constantly.
Very Nutritious Food is subject to a
Martial mystics and characters that
L4 availability roll in desert and
already reduce or ignore their bare-
frozen/Arctic environments.
handed combat modifier do not gain
any additional advantage from this
Poison Resistance
training. They are already doing
Training (20 gp) something similar as part of their
normal class abilities and training.
By drinking a small amount of poison
at regular intervals, the characters The Adventurers’ Guild offers free
strengthen their bodies against the martial arts training for members,
venom of monsters, gases, and other but this comes with a little risk of an
toxic substances. Characters who accident right before an adventure.
spend 20 gp doing this may reroll the Before each game, characters who
first failed Save vs. poison in their train must roll their Tier die (d6 if
next adventure. Only one reroll of they are L1-4, d8 if they are L5-9, and
this type may be performed in any so on). On a roll of a 1, the character
adventure. begins play with 1 less Life point than
normal due to a strained muscle or
However, this training is dangerous.
other gym accident.
Before each game, characters who
underwent poison resistance training
Gambling House (variable
must roll their Tier die (d6 if they are
L1-4, d8 if they are L5-9, and so on). cost)
On a roll of a 1, the character begins
All characters may visit the gambling
play with 1 less Life point than
house between adventures. To deter-
normal due to self-poisoning. This
mine their luck at gambling, decide
15

=== PAGE 20 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
your total budget (how many gp you If the party chooses to follow the
are going to gamble) and roll d10 on map, roll d6 on the Following the
the Gambling House Table. The more Treasure Map Table and play out the
money you bet, the more money you event outlined there. Add +1 if your
could possibly win, but remember: party is with the adventurers’ guild —
the games are rigged against you. the guild’s expert cartographers help
Halflings, rogues, swashbucklers, adventurers to weed out fake maps.
harlequins and assassins roll at +1. A
halfling may reroll a gambling roll Moneylenders (variable
once, using up 1 Luck point, but this
cost)
means the halfling will start the next
adventure with 1 less Luck point. The If you are short on cash, you can
halfling will recover the missing Luck borrow up to 1000 gp with an inter-
point between adventures, or using est rate of 20%. All characters can get
any game mechanic that lets the char- a loan, but the maximum amount of
acter recover 1 Luck point during the money that will be lent out at the
adventure. same time equals 2000 gp, plus or
minus 200 gp times the size of your
town.
Treasure Maps (5d6 gp)
Where there are treasure seekers, For example, in a town with
there is someone willing to sell them a size modifier of -2, the
a map that supposedly leads to maximum that your troupe
hidden riches. Most of these maps are can borrow is 1600 gp. In a
fake, some lead into deathtraps, but +3 size town, the maximum
enough authentic ones keep popping that you can borrow is 2600
up here and there to keep adventurers gp.
hoping. Sometimes, the seller does
You must pay back at least half the
not know that the map he is selling is
sum you borrowed after your next
authentic! A treasure map will cost
adventure (or one month of game
5d6 gp. Use the exploding six rule for
time, if you use a calendar). If you
this roll, so that a map may poten-
don’t, the character will have to fight,
tially have ANY price. The price is just
single handedly and in a dark alley
an indication of the skill of the seller,
(you will need one hand to carry a
not of the reliability of the informa-
torch or lantern, unless the character
tion on the map. Even if a map is
has an ability that lets him/her see in
expensive, there is no guarantee that
the dark), an encounter with enforc-
it’s genuine.
ers (roll on the Riff-Raff Table but
double all numbers encountered).
16

=== PAGE 21 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
You may at any moment during this Good Boots (6 gp)
encounter decide to pay up, if you
All characters, if appropriate, are
have enough valuables or coins with
assumed to have shoes of some kind,
you to cover your debt. This will stop
but characters may invest in good,
the combat, but ALL the valuables
solid boots that offer extra protection.
you carry including all of your equip-
A pair of good boots gives +2 to Saves
ment, magical or mundane, will be
vs. caltrops and other traps/dangers
taken.
that specifically affect the character's
Alternatively you can try to run away feet. If a monster's description explic-
from the ruffians. If you flee, you itly says that the monster attacks the
receive one attack from all the riff-raff character's feet, the boots give a +1
present. These attacks will ignore to the character's Defense roll.
your shield, if any. If you survive,
Use your common sense based on the
attempt a Stealth Save vs. the riff-
character’s shape– in some cases,
raff’s L. If the Stealth Save fails, the
boots make no sense. A centaur or
criminals will catch up with you and
satyr have hooves and can’t wear
you will have to fight them again (they
boots. Very large creatures like giants
may still run away if they fail a morale
and trolls can wear boots that are
roll). If the Save succeeds, you run
specially made for them, but these
away and you either move to another
will cost 20 gp per pair. If you are a
village, or will have to pay up after
fan of book-keeping (boot-keeping?),
your next adventure. Until you
Assume that boots will have to be
remain in the village and until you
replaced after 20 adventures.
pay up, you will have to play this
encounter with street “enforcers”
Flask of Flammable Oil (5
between every adventure. If you move
to another village, there is a 1 in 6 gp)
chance that the criminals will follow
To use a flask of flammable oil, you
you per every 100 gp or fraction of
must use one hand to keep a live
100 gp of debt you have.
flame (a torch, which counts as a
lantern) and hold the flask in the
other hand. You then spend 1 action
Example: You owe 310 gp to
to light a rag or piece of string coming
the mob and decide to put
out of the flask's neck and throw the
some distance between you
flask (lighting it and throwing it
and the enforcers. If you
happens in a single action). Roll d6.
move to another settlement,
On a 1, the flask sprays flaming oil on
there is a 4 in 6 chance the
a friend, who takes 2 points of fire-
criminals will follow you to
based damage. On a 2, the flask
your new location.
doesn't break or doesn't catch fire,
17

=== PAGE 22 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
resulting in no damage (the oil is minotaur) and resell them for 1 gp
wasted anyway). On a 3 or better, the each. The horns of immature mino-
flask inflicts 2 damage on a major foe taurs aren’t good enough to be used
or 3 damage on a horde or group of for this purpose.
minor foes. Add +1 damage against
mummies, and +3 against scarecrows Wineskin (free, +4 gp per
and hay golems. A flask of flammable
refill)
oil can be purchased for 5 gp. Each
character can carry only one. Foes Characters may carry a wineskin and
that are immune to fire-based drink from time to time, keeping
damage will be unaffected by oil. themselves tipsy. Characters who
keep drinking enjoy a +1 on all
wooing rolls and on Saves vs. fear and
Horn (2 gp)
terror, but a -1 on spellcasting rolls,
Some characters may want to carry a -2 on puzzles and -1 and all other
horn to galvanize their friends in Saves. A character may have their
battle. Sounding the horn takes 1 first wineskin for free, but refilling it
turn. All party members of the char- with wine that is strong enough to get
acter sounding the horn gain +1 to these game effects costs 4 gp per
their next Attack roll in melee. How- adventure.
ever, at the end of an encounter in
which a character has sounded the
Flail-Axe (8 gp)
horn, roll a 2 in 6 chance that the
sound attracts wandering monsters. A flail-axe is a dangerous slashing
If the wandering monsters arrive, weapon composed of a heavy axe-
they will appear before the party head attached to a long handle with a
moves to another room or area. Any length of chain. It has the advantage
character may sound the horn, but of a two-handed weapon (+1 to
the sound of multiple horns is not Attack rolls) but can be used only
cumulative, and a horn may be used with one hand (ideally while the other
only once per encounter. hand wields a shield). However, if the
Attack roll is a natural 1, the flail-axe
A horn may be purchased for 2 gp or
hits the user, who automatically loses
created in one hour from the horn of
1 Life (no Defense roll is allowed). A
a unicorn, horned demon, minotaur,
flail-axe can be used by any character
or from any other horned creature
who can use two-handed weapons.
that you deem of appropriate size. If
you play the Minotaur Maze adven-
ture in this book, you may create lots
of horns (2 per every slain adult
18

=== PAGE 23 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Aspergillum (20 gp) Availability Rolls
An aspergillum is a light crushing Special equipment items described in
weapon (-1 on Attack rolls). It is a rod this book are not always available. To
with a silver ball at its end. It affects determine if something can be found
creatures that are vulnerable to silver. in the market, you must perform an
It has an internal reservoir that dis- availability roll. This is rolled like a
perses holy water when the weapon Save vs. a difficulty of 6 (or lower, if
the description of the item says so).
hits, adding the effect of the holy
This Save is always rolled on a d6,
water vial to the damage of the
regardless of the party’s Tier.
weapon IF the target is vulnerable to
holy water. The user controls when Roll for each specific item sought, and
the holy water is used and may thus add the settlement’s size modifier (-3
prevent the holy water from being to +3).
wasted if the target is not vulnerable
● On a success, the item is available
to holy water, or if the blow does not
and may be purchased for its
hit.
standard asking price.
The aspergillum is not sturdy: it has
● On a failure by 1, the item is
a 2 in 6 chance of breaking on any
available but scarcity drives its
Attack roll of 1. If it breaks, it may be
price up: apply a 20% surcharge
repaired in town, at a silversmith’s
(round up) to the item’s gp cost.
workshop, by spending 8 gp. If it
● If the roll fails, the party may try
breaks, all holy water contained
again after one adventure
within is wasted.
(random dungeon or planned
The cost of the aspergillum does NOT
adventure or an adventure gener-
include the vial of holy water. The
ated from the tables in this
character may carry a vial of holy
booklet or from any other Four
water in the aspergillum in addition
Against Darkness supplement).
to a vial carried in a pouch or belt, to
a total of 2 vials carried.
Roll only for items that require an
The aspergillum may be used by any
availability roll, as per their descrip-
character who can use light melee
tion. General equipment described in
weapons.
Four Against Darkness and Four
Against The Abyss does not require
a roll.
19

=== PAGE 24 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Streetwise Rules Here are the most common uses of
Streetwise. In the text of adventures,
Characters may go looking for trouble other Streetwise Saves may be
in the least respectable parts of town. required.
There they could find valuable infor-
mation on new adventuring gigs, or a
Look for Clues: The Streetwise roll
swift death by knife in a dark alley. In
is against L6. Each attempt costs d6
all situations where a character is
gp in bribes (drinks, tips, favors, etc.)
asked to be on the lookout, the char-
On a failure, the search is unfruitful
acter will have to perform a Street-
and nothing happens. On a 1, if the
wise Save. Modifiers to the Save are
character had at least 1 Clue, s/he
given by the character’s class. The
LOSES 1 clue as some information
level of the Save depends on the type
the character believed to be true is
of action attempted (see below).
revealed a red herring. If the charac-
ter has no Clue, s/he either loses 3d6
Streetwise Save Modifiers gp or d3 Life in a street brawl (your
● Fighting classes (classes that add choice – lose automatically d3 Life if
+L to all Attack rolls): +1 you have no coins or other valuables).
On a success, the character gains 1
● Large creatures like trolls, ogres,
Clue. You may use any character of
minotaurs and the like: +2
your choice to perform this roll. One
● Halflings: -1, may use Luck to typical use of this action is when you
reroll (the -1 does NOT apply to are looking for some specific target –
rerolls) for example, when you are trying to
track down a wanted criminal.
● Rogues, swashbucklers, assassins
and other classes that Save as
rogues: +L
Interrogate: To perform this roll,
● Witch-hunters, cambions, atroc- you must have a low-level criminal
ities, sleuths, investigators, that you can interrogate. Any
inquisitors: +L ONLY when per- subdued foe from the Riff-Raff Table
forming interrogation or any minor foe described as a ruf-
fian, reaver, pirate, hoodlum, crimi-
● All others: no modifier.
nal, thief, thug or street enforcer is
perfect for this.
Characters rolling a 1, no matter what
Perform a Streetwise Save vs. the L
the modifier, have done something
of the captured riff-raff +1. The cap-
wrong and will suffer some conse-
tured villain is roughed up and inter-
quences (see the actions listed below).
20

=== PAGE 25 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Gambling House Table (d10)
The character gets involved in a fight/brawl. He will have to start the
next adventure with 1 wound (you may use bandages or
magical/clerical healing to heal him if you wish). The character is not
1-2 welcome to gamble again (he must skip the next gambling activity) and
further gambling rolls on this Table are at -1 (this modifier is cumula-
tive if this result is rolled again) until he scores a major victory (10+
on this Table).
3-4 The character loses all money gambled.
The character loses all money gambled. However, during play the
5-6 character hears some interesting information (choose: roll d12 on the
Rumors Table or roll a 3 in 6 chance of gaining 1 Clue).
7-8 The character wins +10% of the money gambled, rounded up.
9 The character wins +20% of the money gambled, rounded up.
10 The character wins +50% of the money gambled, rounded up.
The character wins +100% of the money gambled but must resist the
temptation to gamble again. Roll a Save vs. L6 temptation (clerics and
paladins add +L, wizards add +½ L, rogues and swashbucklers roll at
-1). On a success, the character can move away from the gambling table
with no ill effects. On a failure, the character must roll again, gambling
all the money gambled on the initial roll plus all the money won. On a
11+
natural 1, the character develops a gambling habit and must gamble,
at a minimum, half the treasure found after each adventure, including
magic items, scrolls etc. A character with a gambling habit will be at -1
to roll on this table until the gambling obsession is removed by a
Blessing. Clerics with this compulsive gambling habit may NOT cast a
Blessing on themselves.
Escolat (”snakebite”),
a dice game similar to
Craps, is a popular
pastime all over
Norindaal.
21

=== PAGE 26 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
rogated. On a success, the character Rumors (d12)
performing the interrogation receives
1 Clue. During the next encounter Roll on the rumors list to determine
with foes of the same type, the foes the information you gain with a suc-
enemies will hate the character who cessful Streetwise roll.
conducted the interrogation. On a
Rumors may be true or false, but the
failure, no information is gained. A
only way to discover the truth is to
roll of natural 1 means the interroga-
investigate. You may write down the
tor gains no information AND is
rumor and act on it later, or start
hated by all foes from the Riff Raff
investigating immediately.
table during the next encounter with
any of them. Each rumor will send you to a corre-
sponding numbered paragraph in the
Scenes list. Read the corresponding
Listen to rumors: Perform a L4 paragraph if you decide to investi-
Streetwise Save. On a failure, the gate. Once you have played through
character finds nothing of interest, one of the paragraphs and the corre-
and may try again after one adven- sponding Scene, cross the Rumor off
ture. On a success, the character rolls the table with a pencil mark. Reroll it
on the Rumors list below. On a if you roll it again, as these are all
natural 1, the character must roll on unique events that will happen only
the Red Herring Table. once over the course of a campaign.
1
Look Tough: Perform a L6 Street-
wise Save. On a failure, the character Bofto the halfling vine dresser has
is beaten in a street brawl, or hurts found a strange star-shaped object in
himself during a chase, and loses d3 his vineyard and has been behaving
Life. On a success, the character gains strangely. If you investigate, go to
reputation as a tough guy and all Scene 9.
encounters with riff-raff, the morale
rolls will always have an additional -1 2
modifier. This bonus lasts until the
A medusa has taken residence in an
character is captured, killed (even if
old hunter’s cabin in the nearby
s/he is resurrected later), or pays a
woods. She is said to wear an emerald
bribe to any riff-raff.
necklace worth a fortune, and to be
extremely easy to bribe, to the point
that some members of an assassins’
guild are trying to hire her for her
22

=== PAGE 27 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
services. If you want to investigate, Red Herring Table (d6)
go to Scene 10.
Trap. Roll on the Riff-Raff Table
3
to determine the nature of the
In the well at the old miller’s farm, opposition. The single character is
just two hours outside of town, a ambushed. This happens in a loca-
tion that is distant enough from the
bunch of thieves have hidden a magic
settlement to be out of sight of the
sword that they stole from a paladin.
authorities. You have the option to
If you want to investigate, go to Scene
surrender all equipment and
11. 1-2)
money carried (including gems and
magical items) or fight. If you fight,
4 you go first. Treat as a normal
combat encounter with no option
Children have spotted mutant fish in
to withdraw. The foes may fail their
a small shallow pool under a bridge.
Morale roll and decide to flee.
They said the fish were chanting and
Other party members may not
calling them, trying to convince them intervene.
to dive in the dirty water. To investi-
gate, go to Scene 12.
Waste of time. You follow some
false track. After some time, you
5 3-4)
realize it will lead to nowhere. You
waste d3 days doing so.
Darr the dwarf was drunk last night,
like most nights. He spoke about a False information. If you have
dragon living among us in disguise. any Clues, you discover that infor-
He seems to know for sure that this mation is false – lose 1 Clue. If you
5)
shapeshifted dragon is up to no good, do not have any Clues at the
moment, lose d6 gp or d3 days as
but then again, when have you met a
3-4 above (your choice).
dwarf who liked a dragon? Go to
Scene 13 if you want to investigate. You hear about some hidden
treasure in some abandoned ruins
and convince the rest of the party
6
to go looking for it. Play a random
The twisted old oak on Blackbird Hill dungeon of d6 rooms, using any
is the house of a couple of lepre- book in your possession that is
6)
chauns who hide a pot of gold coins. appropriate to your party’s experi-
They say they are willing to sell shoes ence Tier. This dungeon will NOT
have a Final Boss – do not roll for
and teach a few of their tricks to the
it. Increase by 1 the number of all
magically inclined. Go to Scene 2 to
minions and vermin encountered
investigate.
in this dungeon.
23

=== PAGE 28 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
7 11
You know the small temple of Tamas Deoldyn the elf is willing to teach the
Zeya next to the fishmongers’ square? secrets of elven archery to anyone, elf
If you remove the third brick from the or not, as long as the would-be
right on the facade of the temple, you archer’s pockets are deep enough. Go
will find a ramp of stairs that lead into to Scene 3 if you are interested.
an underground dungeon.
12
Go to Scene 15 if you want to investi-
gate.
Since she lost her husband in a battle
with dark elves, Shinta the paladin
8 has lost the will to adventure. She will
give her magic sword Agaratha to a
Erol, the innkeeper of the Drunk
person of good will (not necessarily a
Goat, has a teenage daughter named
paladin or a questing knight) who
Shaura who has recently gone miss-
seems worthy of it.
ing. The girl was rumored to flirt with
chaos cultists. Go to Scene 16 if you If you are interested, go to Scene 4.
want to investigate.
9
Daroc the wizard has lost his cat
familiar and has put up a 200 gp
reward for anyone who brings her
back. Go to Scene 5 if you choose to
investigate.
10
Strange winged things have been
spotted at night over the roof of the
burgomaster's house. He seems
unconcerned and says that it’s just a
bunch of drunkards seeing things in
cups of wine. Go to Scene 8 to inves-
tigate.
24

=== PAGE 29 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Scenes a L4 gaze attack or be turned to stone.
Petrified characters are out of the
The following Scenes are mini-adven- game until a Blessing spell is cast on
tures. Some can be resolved with a them. Rogues add +½ L to this Save.
simple choice and a few die rolls.
Reactions (d6): 1 bribe (6d6
These adventures are generated by
gp or 1 jewel or gem worth
Rumors. You may play one of these
at least 15 gp), 2 quest, 3–5
entries ONLY if you were sent here
fight, 6 fight to the death.
by a Rumor. You may reach some
paragraphs only if you are directed Xasartha has an emerald pendant
there by another paragraph. worth 260 gp and a crate containing
2d6 necros (the currency of the Neth-
DO NOT READ THE SCENES IN
erworld). If you want to try on the
ADVANCE, as this will spoil the fun
pendant, choose a character to do so
of discovery and attract the wrath of
and then read Scene 6. You may also
chaos!
decide to sell the pendant without
trying it on.
Scene 1
Xasartha counts as a major foe for XP
You reach the hunter’s cabin. Perform
purposes (1 XP roll).
a L6 Stealth roll with a character of
your choice if you want to have a
Scene 2
chance to surprise the medusa. If this
roll is successful, you get to attack the The leprechaun rumor is real. You
medusa ONCE with all characters may purchase a pair of Shoes of Fast
BEFORE she has a chance to use her Walk for 200 gp. You may purchase
gaze weapon. If the character fails the up to one pair per character. The
Stealth roll, however, the character is wearer of these shoes adds +Tier
automatically turned to stone, with number to Defense rolls when with-
no Save allowed, and the rest of the drawing or fleeing from a melee. The
party must fight the medusa using the shoes will magically adapt to fit any
standard rules (and must Save vs. her character and will always look appro-
stone-turning gaze before they can priate to other clothes worn by the
attack her). character. Only characters who can
use magic items may wear the shoes.
You may also shout to the medusa
Hirelings may also be assigned these
from outside the hunter’s cabin. If
shoes. Animal companions may not.
you do so, roll Reactions for her.
The leprechauns may also teach a
Xasartha the medusa, L4 Boss mon-
single Illusion type spell (any spell
ster, 4 Life. All characters at the
with the word illusion in its name, or
beginning of the battle must Save vs.
described as an illusion of some type)
25

=== PAGE 30 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
to a single character. Choose any Note that these skills, unlike the
illusion spell from any Four Against expert skills of the same name found
Darkness book you have. This will be in Four Against the Abyss, may be
for a price of 100 gp, or free if you taught to any character who can wield
bought at least three pairs of magical a bow.
shoes. The character learns the spell
automatically, as if s/he was learning Scene 4
it from a scroll.
You may accept a quest from the
paladin with a single character. This
Scene 3
must be a character who is allowed to
You may spend money to train with use a sword (edged hand weapon)
the master archer between sessions. and is not a demon or undead. The
You may train each character in your quest is dangerous but, if the charac-
party once between adventures. The ter completes it, the paladin will give
cost for training is 60 gp x the charac- her sword to your character and
ter’s current level, e.g., a L5 character retire. The paladin’s sword is a mas-
would pay 300 gp for a training ses- terwork magical sword. If you are still
sion. At the end of the training ses- interested in the quest, choose a char-
sion, the character may attempt 1 XP acter and go to Scene 7.
roll. The XP roll may, as normal, be
used to attempt to level up if the Scene 5
character is an elf (not a wood elf or
To find the lost cat, you must find 2
fire elf), or attempt to learn one of
Clues. You may NOT use Clues gen-
these two expert skills:
erated in previous adventures: all the
Deadly Accuracy
Clues must be generated in town with
The character has +1 to Attack rolls
Streetwise rolls. Your Clues cost is
when using a bow.
reduced to 1 if you have a beastmas-
Dead Shot ter, a druid or any cat-like character
The character may reroll all failed or a cat animal companion in the
Attack rolls performed with a ranged party. Once you generate enough
weapon. Clues, you find the cat and receive a
reward of 100 gp and 1 XP roll.
The money is spent even if the roll
fails. If you are training multiple
Scene 6
characters, you must first spend
money for all of them and then The pendant is magical. At the begin-
perform all of their XP rolls at the ning of any adventure, the pendant
same time. recharges. During the adventure, the
wearer of this pendant may use 1
26

=== PAGE 31 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Luck point, like the halfling ability of gives the final blow (depletes the last
the same name. If the wearer is a Life point) of any major foe. Agaratha
halfling, the character gains 2 Luck may not be wielded by any character
points instead. who is chaos-tainted (see the rules for
chaos in Caverns of Chaos) or by any
Scene 7 character who is a demon or undead.
The sword may be sold for 450 gp.
You must single-handedly eradicate
a criminal organization that has
Scene 8
caused the demise of the paladin’s
husband, selling him to a band of You have discovered the lair of d6+2
dark elves. The other members of white gargoyles, L5 minions, morale
your party may NOT interfere or help -1, no treasure. The gargoyles are
you in any way, but they may lend you immune to Sleep. Due to their cam-
their magic items, scrolls, potions, etc. ouflage abilities, there is a 3 in 6
chance that the gargoyles will sur-
You must play a random dungeon of
prise the party. If this happens,
10 rooms, using the tiles from Four
perform a Reaction roll to determine
Against Darkness and the rules for a
what they will do. If you fight them,
Bandit Hideout dungeon in this book.
there’s a 2 in 6 chance that any hit
Reduce by 1 all the numbers of
from a mundane weapon will bounce
minions met, to a minimum of 1 per
off their stone-hard skin with no ill
encounter. For the Final Boss, roll on
effects. Magic and masterwork
the Riff Raff Table without reducing
weapons are immune to this effect.
the number of foes encountered (for
purposes of this adventure, the Final If the gargoyles fight, you may NOT
Boss can be a group of minions). If escape from this combat until you
you defeat the Final Boss, you can outnumber the gargoyles, or unless
safely return to the paladin who will all your party members can fly or have
give you Agaratha, her sword. access to magic means of transporta-
tion like teleportation or flight.
Agaratha, masterwork magic edged Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-4
hand weapon +1. Being a masterwork bribe (20 gp each or a single
weapon, Agaratha increases the gem of any value for all the
chance of explosion on Attack rolls by group), 5-6 fight.
1. In addition, the sword has a
magical Attack bonus of +1 and
The gargoyles have no treasure but if
magical Defense bonus of +1. The
you defeat them, you may claim a
wielder receives 1 Luck point (with
reward of 15 gp for each gargoyle
the same use as the halfling ability of
head you bring to the burgomaster.
the same name) every time the sword
27

=== PAGE 32 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Scene 9 Scene 10
Bofto the halfling looks after a large As you come closer to the hunter’s
vineyard together with his wife and cabin, have all the characters perform
his two sons. His produce is in good a Stealth Save vs. L6. If all characters
demand with the local nobles and he are successful, the party reaches the
has been able to make a nice living hunter’s cabin undisturbed. If at least
and save quite a bit recently. A few one character fails, d3+2 agents of
days ago, however, while tending to the guild of assassins will ambush the
his plants, he found a star-shaped party. You must either convince them
object in the ground. He brought it you are not from a competing guild
home and he’s been behaving trying to hire the medusa, or fight
strangely since then, looking absent- them. To convince them, perform a
minded and staring at the clouds all L5 Streetwise Save. If you succeed,
day while his family takes care of the they let you go back to town. If you
vineyard. fail, they will attack and act first.
As you arrive on his farm, you see the If you decide to fight, you go first.
halfling sitting morosely in the yard.
The agents are HCL+2 minions
He barely notices you. You try to start
armed with daggers. They have a total
some conversation, but he just
treasure of 4d6 gp. They count as a
mutters to himself that “the clouds
minion encounter for XP purposes.
show They are coming today”. A star-
Once this encounter is over, you may
shaped object, not unlike a small, red
reach the cabin by playing Scene 1 or
starfish, hangs from a thin cord from
decide to go back to town.
his neck. Will you:
Try to steal the star shaped object? If
Scene 11
so, choose one of your characters to
do so and go to Scene 14. You reach the old miller’s farm, but
there is no well. It seems the story
Try to talk to Bofto’s family? Go to
about the paladin's sword was just a
Scene 17.
red herring. Disappointed, you return
You may decide that you have nothing
to town. As you do so, roll a 2 in 6
to do here. In this case, go back to
chance of an encounter on the Riff
your standard activities using any
Raff Table or on the Outside of Town
section of this book or leaving for a
Ambush Table, your choice.
random dungeon or a planned adven-
ture in any Four Against Darkness
book in your possession.
28

=== PAGE 33 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Scene 12 Dragon’s Lair Thematic Dungeon
Table to determine which kind of
As you get near the pond, eerie voices
dragon you will have to fight.
speaking in an alien tongue call you
to the water. All the characters must If you want, you may generate the
Save vs. L5 hypnosis or be dragged in three Clues with 3 successful Street-
the water by chaos-infected fish. All wise rolls at L6. On any roll of 1 or 2,
hypnotized characters will take 1 you end up in the wrong neighbor-
damage per turn until another char- hood and must play a combat encoun-
acter spends 1 turn moving them out ter against a random foe from the Riff
of the water. Any character helping Raff Table or the Outside of Town
another out of the water must roll the Ambush Table, your choice. On a
Save again. If all the characters fail failure, you may roll again later. On a
the Save, the party is destroyed. success, you generate 1 Dragon Clue
that you may use ONLY to find the
Any characters with chaos taint auto-
dragon.
matically fail the Save.
If all characters pass the Save or are Scene 14
rescued, the hypnotic mutant fish
To steal the star-shaped object,
may be caught and dried. This turns
perform a thievery Save vs. L6.
them into the equivalent of d6+3
Rogues and halflings add +L. Swash-
Food rations that may be kept or sold
bucklers and assassins Save at +½ L.
for 2 gp each (as rare, tasty fish with
Elves Save at +1. You can try only
unusual colors and shapes – if the
once. If you fail, go to Scene 18. If you
party is on friendly terms with any
succeed, go to Scene 19.
chaos cultists, you may sell each Food
ration for 5 gp). This Scene counts as
2 encounters with minions for XP Scene 15
purposes, even if the fish have no
Create and play a small dungeon of 7
combat stats.
rooms, using the room tiles found in
Four Against Darkness. If you have
Scene 13
Lost Temples of Qaarra, use that
book instead. The small temple of
You decide if the story is real or not.
Tamas Zeya is actually a cover for a
If it is not real, just cross it off the
secret temple hidden in its basement.
table. If it is real, you may, at any
moment of the campaign, spend 3
Clues to find the dragon. This is NOT Scene 16
a Secret and you gain no XP roll for
You must spend 2 Clues to find the
this, but you will gain XP as normal
location of the cult. These may be
for defeating the dragon. Roll on the
Clues that your party has kept from
29

=== PAGE 34 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
previous adventures or Clues that you Freeing the girl from the cult gives
generate in your current location with you access to 1 XP roll and a reward
Streetwise rolls. Once you do so, you of 150 gp.
find the entrance to a small dungeon.
Create and play a small dungeon of Scene 17
10 rooms, using the room tiles found
You talk to Bofto’s wife and two
in Four Against Darkness. If you
young sons, who are working some-
have Lost Temples of Qaarra, use
where else in the vineyard. They
that book instead. As you meet this
confirm that Bofto is behaving
dungeon’s Final Boss, you actually
strangely and they kindly ask you to
meet the local branch of the Silent
leave. If you insist, you may continue
Scream chaos worshippers, who are
investigating by playing Scene 9.
indeed keeping the girl as a prisoner
and are trying to convert her.
Scene 18
The Silent Scream: 9 L3 minions
led by a HCL+2 priestess (a Boss with You fail to steal the star-shaped
HCL+3 Life) who will use her power object. The halfling screams for the
of Silence against the party with her attempted theft and you quickly
first action. If this happens, for the leave. Return to your investigations,
remainder of the fight all casters but delete Rumor 1 from the Rumors
(including clerics trying to use their Table.
prayers like Blessing and Healing)
must Save vs. her L+2 every time they Scene 19
try to cast spells. Casters add +L to
As you steal the star-shaped object,
the Save. If the Save fails, the spell is
the halfling collapses to the ground.
wasted and has no effect.
The star-shaped object writhes in
Cultists and priestess have normal your hands. The character who
morale, but roll independently: it picked it up must perform a L8 Will
may happen that the priestess flees Save or gain 1 Madness. Spellcasters
and the cultist remain to fight, or vice and clerics add +L to this Save. Hal-
versa. Treasure: three treasure rolls flings can reroll a failed Save.
at -1, using any book appropriate to
This is a cursed item, and you may get
your party’s adventuring Tier.
rid of it only by meeting invisible
Reactions: 1-3 bribe (500 gp to let gremlins and letting them take this
the girl free), 4-6 fight. object. If this happens, you will break
If you flee, the next time you meet the the curse and be free. No amount of
Silent Scream, the girl will be a full- magic or blessing will destroy the
fledged cultist and you will have to curse – only invisible gremlins will
capture her with non-lethal means. take it away. As long as the curse is
30

=== PAGE 35 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
operative, every time the party meets If you suffer a total party kill (all your
a major foe (Boss or Weird Monster), characters die), the star-shaped
you must roll a 2 in 6 chance that, object will NOT disappear from the
instead of that monster, you encoun- campaign. Whenever you find a trea-
ter a Star-slayer from Beyond. sure with your next party, no matter
what is the entity of that treasure, you
Star-slayer from Beyond, HCL+6
must roll a 1 in 6 chance of finding
Weird Monster demon, HCL+5 Life,
this cursed item. If this happens, you
4 attacks (tentacles, each inflicting
must assign the star-shaped object to
Tier damage), no treasure. Upon
one of your characters. Again, the
seeing the Star-slayer, all characters
only way to break the curse will be to
must perform a HCL+1 Save or gain
have the star-shaped object stolen by
1 Madness and lose 2 Life. Any char-
invisible gremlins.
acter gaining 1 or more Madness will
be unable to flee from the encounter
(in this case, you may split the party,
fleeing with those characters who
succeed the Save).
If the monster is encountered instead
of an adventure’s Final Boss, the
Star-Slayer will have the treasure of
that Final Boss. In all other cases, the
Star-Slayer will have no treasure.
Defeating the Star-Slayer gives 2 XP
rolls but does NOT break the curse.
If the character carrying the star-
shaped object dies, another character
in the party will automatically pick up
the star-shaped object and the curse
will continue to affect the party.
Reactions: always fights to
the death.
The Star-Slayer From Beyond
31

=== PAGE 36 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Following the Treasure Map Table (d6)
Deathtrap. Enemies of the party have set up an ambush to steal their
gold and equipment. Roll on the Riff-Raff Table to determine the
nature of the opposition. The party is ambushed. This happens in a
location that is distant enough from the settlement to be out of sight
1-2 of the authorities. You have the option to surrender all equipment
and money carried (including gems and magical items) or fight. If
you fight, the foes go first. Treat as a normal combat encounter with
no option to withdraw. The foes may fail their Morale roll and decide
to flee.
Waste of time. The map is useless and leads nowhere. During the
trip, however, roll a 3 in 6 chance that the party is attacked by
3
enemies. Roll on the Outside of Town Opposition Table to determine
the nature of the encounter.
The map contain accurate but incomplete information. The
next time the party buys another map, the info from this map will give
a one time +1 bonus when rolling on this Table. However, even if you
4 apply the bonus, a roll of a natural 1 still counts as a Deathtrap (result
1 above). If you roll up this result multiple times, you may use the
various +1 bonuses cumulatively on a single roll, or on separate rolls,
as desired.
The Real Deal. The map leads to a true treasure. Roll d6 on the
5+
Maps Leads To... Table and play out the result.
32

=== PAGE 37 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
The Map Leads to... (D6)
A complex of underground caves. Generate a random dungeon using the standard 4AD tables
and rules. Do not roll for content in the entrance room. The dungeon ends after d6+3 rooms. From
that point, all unopened doors and passages are considered dead ends. The last room automatically
1
contains a Boss monster with double the maximum treasure available and 2 additional Life points.
If you have Twisted Dungeons, roll twice on the table there and choose the result that seems more
appropriate.
A forgotten temple hidden in the wilderness. Chaos cultists have taken residence here. You
must fight them, with no possibility of withdrawal. Roll on the Chaos Cult Table to determine the
2 abilities of the cultists. Upon defeating them, you will find a golden idol worth 1d3x100 GP in
addition to any treasure carried by the cultists. Their leader is a L4 Boss with 4 Life and 2 attacks.
He has 3d6 gp and a 3 in 6 chance of carrying a random scroll (roll on any spell list of your choice).
A small camp of hostile humanoids (orcs, etc). You may ignore the camp, return to your
settlement and report to the authorities, who will send a small military expedition to deal with the
menace. You receive 4d6 gp for the information but your adventure ends here. You gain no XP
rolls. Alternatively, you may enter the camp during the day, while the orcs are sleepy. You must
pass a L4 Stealth Save with the characters to enter the village. If the roll is successful, you steal the
orcs’ loot (roll on the 4AD Treasure Table, with a minimum loot of 25 gp) and no fight will be
necessary. If you fail the roll, the orcs will detect you and attack. There are 2d6+3 orcs in the village
3
(L3 minions, morale-1, treasure as described above), 1d3 Orc Bosses (L3 Boss, 3 Life each) and
there is a 2 in 6 chance of a black ogre (L5 Boss, 4 Life, inflicts 2 damage with each strike, morale
+1). If you skulk into the village, you may send in some characters and leave some other characters
outside of the village. Decide which characters are attempting the roll BEFORE rolling a Stealth
Save for the whole group, using the worst modifier. If the Save fails, the orcs will attack only the
characters who entered the camp, gaining the initiative. PCs out of the camp may join the fray 2
turns later (assassins entering later do not get a chance to use their sneak attack ability).
An underground structure. Generate it like a standard 4AD dungeon of 2d6 rooms/corridors.
Roll for content in the first room too. When you have generated the required number of rooms,
the dungeon is complete and any door opening into another room is automatically a dead end. If
4
you roll any treasure, you do not find it, but keep track of it. The Boss will be in the last room and
will have ALL the treasure generated in this dungeon, plus its own treasure. Use a Boss from any
book appropriate to your party’s Tier.
As 4 above, but all monsters encountered are Bosses! There will be no Vermin or minions.
5 There will be no dragon — reroll if you meet a dragon —the treasure of the Final Boss will be a
minimum of 200 gp and 2 random magic items.
A lich’s sepulchral chamber. This is a dungeon of 1 room.As they enter, all PCs must Save vs.
L7 death magic or lose 1 Life. Necromancers add +L to this Save. Undead and artificial characters
are immune. The lich (HCL+4 undead Boss) has a number of Life points equal to all the Life points
lost by the party to death magic, +4. It is defended by 7 dark skeletons (HCL+2 minions, undead,
crushing weapons hit them at +1, immune to ranged attacks). The PCs may not attack the lich until
all the skeletons are destroyed or engaged. An unengaged character may use 1 attack to try
destroying the Lich’s phylactery (a container where the lich keeps its heart) by performing a
6
successful ranged attack vs. L6. You may try as many times as you like – each attempt costs 1
action. If the phylactery is destroyed, the lich is immediately reduced to 1 Life point, or destroyed
if it has already 1 Life point. The lich’s treasure is 10d6 gp, 1 treasure map (see rules for treasure
maps) and 3 scrolls, each with a random spell from any book you own (choose on which table to
roll; you may roll on tables from different books if you want). The lich is immune to Sleep, poison
and disease, and never rolls for morale. It always fights to the death. If you have Warlike Woes,
roll on the Boss Lair Feature Table, and add 2d6 gp to the lich’s treasure.
33

=== PAGE 38 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Riff-Raff Table (d10)
Select a random character. A personal enemy (love rival, church or guild rival, etc. –
come up with some interesting story!) of that character confronts the party. The foe is
a Boss, 1 level lower than the hero (minimum L1), 3 Life, accompanied by d3 L2
1
scoundrels (minions). They carry 2d6 GP in total and roll morale at -1. They must be
fought. If the Boss is killed, that character may disregard this result if it comes up again
in another situation (but this result may still happen to another character).
2d6 Brigands, L d3+1 minions. Morale -1. Treasure is 1 GP each. They have a 1 in
2
6 chance of surprising the party. You may bribe them with 20 gp per brigand.
d6+4 Street thugs, L2 minions, Morale -1, Treasure: d6 gp total. You may bribe
3
them with 45 gp total or fight.
d6 Half-orc thugs, HCL+2 minions. Normal morale. Treasure is 2d6 gp in total.
4
They can be bribed with 20 gp each.
d6+2 Half-goblin ruffians, L3 minions. The half-goblins are armed with poisoned
knives. Any character losing 1 or more Life to their attacks must Save vs. L4 Poison or
5
be at -1 to all Defense rolls until the end of the encounter. Halflings and barbarians
add +½ L to this Save. Morale -1, Treasure -1. They can be bribed with 25 gp each.
d3 Half-ogre reavers, L4 Bosses with d3+1 Life each. Normal morale, treasure -1.
6 They can be bribed with a single magic item, a soul cube (from Four Against the
Netherworld) or 50 gp each.
Minotaur enforcer/brawler, L5 Boss with HCL Life (minimum 4), morale +1, no
7 Treasure. Counts as +2 L on his first attack due to his charge. May be bribed with 80
gp. Hates halflings.
d6+1 Hoodlums, HCL+1 minions (mimimum L3) armed with sticks, treasure: d6
gp in total. If any party member is already wounded when the hoodlums are encoun-
8 tered, that character has -1 to Defense rolls vs. the hoodlums. They can be bribed with
25 gp each. You may also choose to bribe only a few of them: those who are bribed will
leave and the others will remain to fight you.
d6+2 Gangsters, HCL+1 minions armed with knives, treasure: 2d6+1 gp in total.
9 They can be bribed with 30 gp each. You may also choose to bribe only a few of them:
those who are bribed will leave and the others will remain to fight you.
d3 minor Philtre Wraiths, HCL+3 minions that attack with claws. No treasure.
10 These are humans or half-humans addicted to alchemical compounds. They can be
bribed with 1 potion each.
Roll on this table when the party meets oppositions from their own home-
town. While monsters in dungeons may be bribed ONLY if the result of the
reaction roll so allows, these street ruffians have no reaction rolls and may
be bribed automatically. XP is assigned as per the categories the enemies
belong to (Boss, minions etc). If the party is expert Tier (L5 to 9) increase L
by 2 and number of minor foes encountered by 50%, rounding up. If the
party is of heroic Tier (L10 to 14), increase L by 4 and double numbers of
minor foes encountered. If the party is L15+, increase L by 8, triple the
numbers of minor foes, and double the Life points of all major foes.
34

=== PAGE 39 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Outside of Town Ambush Table (d6)
2d6 Orc ambushers: L4 minions, 1 in 6 chance of surprise, treasure 1d6 gp
each. Armed with hand weapons. They must roll Morale at -1 every time the
1 party casts a spell.
Reactions: Fight
d6 Half-troll ambushers: L4 minions, morale 0, 1 in 6 chance of surprise,
total treasure 3d6 gp. Armed with non-metallic, crushing two-handed weapons
2 (war clubs and wooden mallets) that can be sold for 1 gp each.
Reactions: Fight
d6+1 operatives from the local thieves guild: Ld3+2 minions (roll d3+2
to determine their L), morale 0, total treasure 5d6 gp, 2 in 6 chance of surprise.
The party’s Defense rolls on the first turn are at -1 if the operatives attack with
surprise, and characters may not use the bonus from their shields against this
3
first attack. Characters with the Danger Sense skill will defend normally and
may use the bonus from shields.
Reactions: Fight
d6+3 Savage beastmen: L4 minions (normal morale, no treasure) led by a
shaman (L5 Boss, 6 Life, normal morale, 1 treasure roll at +1). Every turn that
he is not attacked, the shaman has a 2 in 6 chance of summoning a bearwolf
(L6 animal Boss, 5 Life, no treasure, normal morale, 2 damage, hates dwarves).
4
In any turn in which at least one attack is assigned to the shaman, no matter
whether the attack hits or not, do NOT roll for his chance of summoning the
bearwolf. A single bearwolf per encounter may be summoned.
Reactions: Fight
d6 Lizardmen reavers: HCL+1 minions, led by a a HCL +2 Boss with 4 Life.
Armed with javelins that they will throw as a HCL+2 surprise ranged attack
5 before the melee. Their total treasure is 6d6 gp.
Reactions: Fight
d6+1 Dwarven highwaymen: HCL+2 minions. Armed with shortswords
and crossbows, the highwaymen will shoot 1 ranged attack (HCL+2) each
before the melee. Morale -1. Treasure: 2d6 GP per highwayman. The cross-
6
bows are good quality and may be sold for 30 gp each.
Reactions: Fight
These are all basic level minions. Each encounter counts for XP purposes
(you get 1 XP roll every 10 encounters). If they have a fixed L instead of
HCL, increase their L by 1 and their numbers by +3 for every Tier above
basic your party is. For example, instead of d6 L4 half troll ambushers, a
heroic party (L10-14) will meet d6+6 L6 half troll ambushers.
35

=== PAGE 40 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Weird Monsters Around Town Table (d6)
Armored land shark: HCL+5 Weird Monster, HCL+3 Life (minimum 4), damage 2. If
encountered in the open, 2 in 6 chance of surprise as it emerges from the ground. In a dungeon,
it loses this ability. In its first turn, it will perform a single L7 attack on a random target. In the
1 following turns, it will perform 2 L6 attacks per turn against random targets. Every time it is hit
by mundane attacks, roll d6. It ignores the hit on a roll of 5 or 6. Morale +1. Treasure: 2d6 gems
worth 1d6 x 5 GP each.
Reactions: 1-2 Bribe (1 gem of any value or 6 food), 3-6 Fight.
Vampire Hound: HCL+3 Weird Monster, 5 Life. Undead. Any target hit by the hound must
Save vs Magic 5 (wizards and clerics add +½ L) or lose their next action. It takes 3 damage from
2 a vial of holy water. Vampire hounds will not cross running water so if the party retreat behind
a river or stream they receive no attack by the hound. Treasure +1, normal morale.
Reactions: 1 Flee, 2-4 Fight, 5-6 Fight to the death.
Shargaroth: HCL+3 Weird Monster, 2 Life x character, 1 attack per character. Immune to
Sleep spells. You may not retreat from a combat with a Shargaroth -- a protoplasmic mass of
writhing tentacles stretching to touch any target in range and hit with their caustic touch. Any
hero hit must Save vs. L5 magic or gain 1 Madness. When the shargaroth manifests, it will have
2 Life per every character present (include any NPCs, hirelings but not animals), and will always
3 have 1 attack per target. A hero who is taken over by Madness is killed and rises as a Shargaroth
after 1 turn, attacking the party. Treasure: when the Shargaroth is killed, its body dissolves, but
there is a 3 in 6 chance of finding a lump of crystallized matter where its internal organs were (5
in 6 if you have a wandering alchemist). This organ stores the creature’s bio-electricity. A wizard
may use it to perform a one time casting of the Lightning spell. You may also sell it to the
alchemists’ guild for 200 gp.
Bonnacon: HCL+2 Weird Monster, 4 Life, Morale -1. No treasure. This large, antelope-like
four legged grazing animal is hunted for its meat and its curved horns, and is sometimes kept in
dungeons as a source of meat and fire. When the bonnacon flees, as a result of a failed Morale
4 roll or reaction, it sprays flaming feces. All characters must Save vs. L5 fire, at +1 if they wield
a shield, or take 2 damage. The flaming excrements may be sold to alchemists for 1d6 gp, or used
as the equivalent of a lantern until the end of the adventure.
Reaction (d6): 1-4 flee, 5-6 Fight.
Scissorhead Beetle: HCL+2 Weird Monster, 8 Life.Treasure -1. Morale -1. If a character rolls
a 1 when defending from this giant beetle, his shield is destroyed. If the hero has no shield, the
character must roll to defend again. On a failure, the hero loses half of its current Life, rounded
5 up, and lose the use of a random arm (roll d6, 1-3 shield arm, 4-6 weapon arm) until all the
character’s Life points have been healed.
Reactions (d6): 1 Flee, 2-3 Fight, 4-6 Fight to the death.
Lightning Elemental: HCL+4 Weird Monster, 10 Life, elemental. Immune to all spells. Hitting
it with the Lightning spell increases its L by 2. Non-magical armor and shields give no Defense
bonus against its electrical attacks. Rogue still receive their +L Defense bonus, but no bonus
6 from armor. Treasure: none, but if it is defeated, any spellcaster in the party gains 1 free Lightning
spell that must be used before the end of the adventure (if the spell is not used, it disappears).
Reactions (d6): 1Flee, 2 Peaceful, 3 Bribe (1 Lightning spell), 4 Fight, 5-6 Fight to the Death.
36

=== PAGE 41 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Chaos Cult Table (d6)
Xichtul’s Children: d6+1 L3 minions, Morale +1. Roll a 2 in 6 chance
that they are led by a champion of Xichtul (L5 Boss, 5 Life, d3 attacks
1 each turn, immune to Sleep and Lightning, 1 Treasure roll at +1).
Reactions: 1 Bribe (15 gp each or 1 scroll), 2-3 Fight, 4-6 Fight to the
death.
The Silent Scream: d6+3 L3 minions led by a HCL+2 priestess (a
Boss with HCL+3 Life) who will use her power of Silence against the
party with her first action. If this happens, for the remainder of the fight
2 all casters must Save vs. her L+2 every time they try to cast spells. They
add +L to the Save. If the Save fails, the spell is wasted. Cultists and
priestess have normal morale. Treasure: 3 rolls at -1.
Reactions: 1-3 peaceful, 4-6 fight.
The Brotherhood of Change: d4+3 L4 minions. They are armed
with large chaotic knives called changeblades. Every character wounded
by a changeblade must Save vs. L3 magic or lose the use of an arm (the
first time this happens will prevent the character from using two handed
weapons or force him to drop one object held in his hand. If this happens
twice, the character will only be able to fight at -2 in unarmed combat,
3-4 using legs to kick. Normal morale. Treasure: 1 roll at +1. Each change-
blade can be sold for 20 gp. Non-chaotic characters may not use
changeblades, as this would quickly turn them into chaos worshippers.
Characters who are already aligned with chaos (e.g., blasphemous ones,
clerics of Ter Za Necht) may use them (they count as light Masterwork
slashing weapons in their hands).
Reactions: 1-3 Bribe (20 gp per cultist), 4-6 Fight.
The Dark Blood Sisterhood: d3 L6 minions. These fanatic women
will use their first action to spray their blood against the party. All
characters must Save vs. L5 poison (elves Save at -1, dwarves and
barbarians at +1) or be infected by a terrible skin condition that will
5-6 give them -1 to attack, and make ranged attacks and spell casting
impossible. The effect of the dark blood disappears after 3 encounters,
or immediately if a Blessing is used per each character affected. Morale
+2. Every Sister wears a ruby pendant worth 15 gp.
Reactions: 1-2 Bribe, 3-4 Fight, 5-6 Fight to the death.
37

=== PAGE 42 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Thematic For all thematic dungeons, if you have
the Warlike Woes supplement, roll
Dungeons on the Final Boss Lair Feature Table
for additional variation. Feel free to
The average dungeon in 4AD is a reroll a result that doesn’t make sense
mixture of many common elements with your current theme.
that may be found nearly everywhere.
If you have Twisted Dungeons, roll
If you prefer, you may generate a
on that supplement to make the
theme for the dungeon before enter-
dungeon unique.
ing, to create an internal logic that
will dictate the types of monsters and Additional thematic dungeons are
treasure found, or just for the sake of published in separate supplements
variety. Some of these themes create (e.g., Caverns of Chaos describes
smaller but deadlier dungeons. These dungeons infested by chaos worship-
are just perfect for guild missions. pers, the Crucible of Classic Critters
describes woodland dungeons, and
Digressions of the Devouring Dead
describes necromantic dungeons).
I Changed My Mind, You
Twisted Dungeons and Twisted
Didn’t Tell Me We Were
Minions may be used to create addi-
Up Against A Dragon!
tional random variations and sur-
As soon as you have generated the prises.
entrance room on your dungeon and
have stepped in, you will realize what
you have gotten into. Claw marks on Theme Table (d10)
the stone floors, for example, may
1 Dragon’s Lair
reveal the presence of a dragon. You
may choose to backtrack at this point 2 Ghastly Mine
and exit the dungeon: but if you do, 3 Giant’s Lair
the entrance to the dungeon will be
4 Fiendish Abyss
lost forever, and the party's morale
will be so low that all your Attack rolls 5 Minotaur Maze
during your next combat encounter 6 Bandit Hideout
will be at -1 (this does not apply to
7 Take no Prisoners
any artificial or elemental charac-
8 Mushrooms in the Megadungeon
ters). If you decide to stay in the
dungeon, follow the guidelines in the 9 Delving Deeper and Deeper
table below to create the thematic 10 Choose one of the above
dungeon.
38

=== PAGE 43 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Dragon’s Lair chance to reconsider – maybe taking
on a dragon is too much for your
Generate this as a normal 4AD party’s current level?
random dungeon, but the dungeon Even if the dragon is considered the
layout will be complete after only four Final Boss of this dungeon, its stats
rooms, and the last room will auto- and treasure are NOT increased as
matically contain a dragon of some per the Final Boss rules. The dragon
kind. You MUST roll for the dragon’s will NOT automatically fight to the
reactions. The dragon’s stats are death and you may perform a Reac-
detailed below. tion roll for the dragon if you want.
Dragon Type Table (d6)
1-3 Small Dragon
4-5 Young Red Dragon
Roll d6: on a 1-3 you encoun-
ter a Darkness Dragon, on a
6
4-6 you encounter a Ghoul
Dragon
Once you step into the dungeon, you
will understand that it is a dragon’s
lair and you may spend 2 Clues, if
desired, to determine the type of
dragon BEFORE encountering it in
the final room. This will give you a
39

=== PAGE 44 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Small Dragon. HCL+5 Boss Darkness Dragon. HCL+8 Boss
monster (maximum L10), dragon, 5 monster, dragon, 12 Life, 4 attacks,
Life, 2 attacks, 3 treasure rolls at +1. treasure +1. The darkness dragon
On each turn of the dragon’s, roll d6 loses 4 Life if hit by a Lightning spell.
to determine what it does. On a 1 or The darkness dragon counts as TWO
2, the dragon breathes fire, inflicting major foes for XP purposes.
1 damage to all characters who fail to
Reactions (d6): 1–2 bribe
Save vs. HCL+4 dragon breath (each
(1d3x 100 gp), 3 Quest, 4–6
character adds +½ L, rounded
fight.
down). On a 3 to 6, the Dragon does
not breathe and bites 2 random char-
acters instead. Small dragons are Ghoul Dragon. HCL+9 undead
never met as random monsters. Boss monster, dragon, 8 Life, 2
attacks, treasure +1. A character
Reactions (d6): 1 Sleeping
wounded by a ghoul dragon must
(all characters can attack at
Save vs. L4 poison or be paralyzed.
+2 on their first Attack roll),
Elves add +L to this Save. A paralyzed
2–3 bribe (all the gold of the
character is automatically hit if
party, with a minimum of
attacked. The Blessing spell removes
100 gp or 1 magic item), 4–5
paralysis on one character. This
fight, 6 quest.
dragon counts as TWO major foes for
XP purposes. If you have Four
Against the Abyss, use its Treasure
Young red dragon. HCL+8 Boss
Table for this dragon.
monster, dragon, 8 Life, 2 attacks, 4
treasure rolls at +1. As its first attack,
Reactions: always fight to
the dragon will breathe fire, all char-
the death.
acters must Save vs. HCL+6 dragon
If any dragon encountered in this
breath (all characters add +½ L), or
thematic dungeon gives a Quest
take d3 damage. Thereafter, the
(remember, even if the dragon is the
dragon will perform 2 claw attacks
Final Boss you may still roll for its
per turn (1 damage each).
Reactions), you may extend the map
Reactions (d6): 1 Sleeping beyond the initial number of rooms
(all characters can attack at described in the theme. Assume that
+2 on their first Attack roll), the dragon will show you a secret
2–3 bribe (300 gp), 4–5 door/passage into a different section
fight, 6 quest. of the dungeon. Use any Quest Table
from any book you own to generate
the dragon’s quest.
40

=== PAGE 45 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Ghastly Mine In the mine, any treasure in gp you
find has a 3 in 6 chance of being a
This theme generates an under- single gem or nugget of the same
ground mine that has been run over value.
by undead. Generate it as a standard All traps found will be a collapsing
random dungeon of 9 rooms. Use the section of the mine (all characters in
normal vermin generated by the the party must Save vs. L5 trap or
Vermin Table in Four Against Dark- take 1 wound; dwarves and rogues
ness. For every room with minions, add +L, gnomes add +½ L). If more
roll a 4 in 6 chance of disregarding than 3 sections of the mine collapse,
whatever minions you have rolled and the structure of the mine is compro-
roll on the Ghastly Mine Minions mised. Any further cave-in trap will
Table instead. Each time you meet a be L6 and inflict 2 damage on a failed
Boss or a Weird Monster, roll a 4 in Save, and the mine will collapse after
6 chance of meeting a major undead. the party exits the dungeon, trapping
If this happens, roll on the Ghastly forever any character left for dead,
Mine Major Foe Table. paralyzed or turned to stone.
Ghastly Mine Minions Table (d6)
d6+1 Skeletons, HCL+2 undead minions, No treasure. Immune to
Sleep and poison. Crushing weapons attack Skeletons at +1. Arrows
1-3
are at -1. Skeletons never test morale.
Reactions: Always fight to the death.
d6 +2 Zombies, HCL+2 undead minions, no treasure. Immune to
Sleep and poison. Arrows are at -1 against zombies. Zombies never
4-5
test morale.
Reactions: Always fight to the death.
2d6+1 minor ghouls, HCL+3 undead, normal treasure. Immune to
Sleep and poison. A character wounded by a ghoul must Save vs.
HCL+1 poison or be paralyzed. Elves add +L to this Save. A paralyzed
character is automatically hit if attacked. The Blessing spell removes
6
paralysis. A paralyzed character must be carried out of the dungeon
by his comrades, and is killed by wandering monsters if left alone in
a room.
Reactions: 1 flee, 2-4 fight, 5 trial of champions, 6 fight to the death.
41

=== PAGE 46 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Ghastly Mine Major Foe Table (d6)
Minor Mummy, HCL+3 undead Boss, 4 Life, 2 attacks, treasure +2,
never test morale, immune to sleep and poison. Any character killed by
a mummy has a 3 in 6 chance of becoming another mummy. If this
1-2
happens, it will rise one turn later and attack the party. Minor mummies
are attacked at +2 by all Fire-based spells.
Reactions: always fight.
Minor Skeletal Demon, HCL+5 undead, 7 Life, 2 attacks, 3 treasure
rolls, morale +1. For every wound inflicted on a characters, their spilt
blood spawns 1 armored skeleton, arriving in your attack turn. The
3 armored skeletons are HCL+3 undead minions, no treasure. Immune
to sleep and poison. Arrows hit them at -1. They never test morale.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 magic challenge, 3-5 fight, 6 quest (you may roll
on the Minor Unique Quest Table in this book if you want).
Minor Wraith, HCL+5 undead, 6 Life, 2 treasure rolls. Before the fight
starts, there is a 1 in 6 chance that all lanterns are extinguished till the
end of the fight. Characters hit by the wraith must Save vs. L3 magic or
lose 1 level. A wraith can only be hit by magic or silvered weapons,
4 spells, holy water (they lose 2 Life per vial thrown), or attacks from
masterwork weapons.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 bribe (1 magic or masterwork item), 3 quest (you
may roll on the Minor Unique Quest Table in this book if you want),
4–6 fight.
Minor Vampire, HCL+6 undead, 6 Life. Any character damaged by a
vampire must Save vs. L4 magic or lose 1 level. Vampires are affected
only by magic weapons, spells, characters with the Vampire hunter skill,
5 holy water (1 Life per vial), or attacks that inflict 2 wounds with a single
blow. See vampirism in Four Against the Abyss for additional details.
Reactions (d6): 1–3 bribe (200 gp), 4–5 fight, 6 quest (you may roll
on the Minor Unique Quest Table in this book if you want).
Minor Ghoul King, HCL+4 undead, 7 Life, 4 attacks, treasure +1 OR
a secret document that counts as 3 Clues (choose). A character wounded
by the ghoul king must Save vs. HCL+4 poison or be paralyzed. Elves
6
Save at +L. Halflings reroll a failed Save. A paralyzed character is
automatically hit if attacked. The Blessing spell removes paralysis.
Reactions: always fight to the death.
42

=== PAGE 47 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Giant’s Lair fails a Defense roll). Ignore bonus for
shields and armor; halflings and
Generate this dungeon as a standard goblins defend at +L against the
dungeon, but do not use the usual thrown boulder. Lutins, satyrs,
system to determine when you meet dwarves and elves defend at +1.
the Final Boss. The dungeon layout All spells hit the giant at +2.
ends immediately when you have
For its treasure, roll 3 times on a
generated a number of rooms equal
treasure table from a book appropri-
to HCL+5. If your party is high level,
ate to the party’s level, and double all
you may need more than one sheet of
gp treasure rolled.
paper to complete the adventure. The
Final Boss, a hill giant, will automat- Reactions: Always fights to the
ically be encountered in the last death.
room. The final room may not
be a corridor and may not be
small: draw a room of your
choice of at least 9 squares.
All doors and openings you
did not visit when you draw
your final room will be dead
ends.
Hill giant, HCL+2 Boss mon-
ster, 8 Life, 2 attacks per turn
(2 damage each), always
attacks random targets unless
the party includes dwarves (in
that case, one attack will
always be directed at a dwarf,
and the other attack will be
directed at a random target -
but include the dwarf when
rolling to select the random
target).
On its first turn, there is a 4
in 6 chance that the giant will
throw a boulder at a random
target (3 damage if the target
43

=== PAGE 48 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
44

=== PAGE 49 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Fiendish Abyss
Generate this as a standard dungeon
Prisoner Table (d6)
using the Four Against Darkness, but
use only monsters and content from
Fiendish Foes (or Four Against the The prisoner is a noble who went
on adventure but failed miserably,
Abyss if your party is of Expert level
ending up in a monster’s clutches.
or above). If you do not have these 1-3
The noble has a mission for you, if
books, increase all Levels by 2
you want. Roll on the Minor
(including the Save level of traps) and
Unique Quest Table in this book.
all number of encountered minions
by 2. As you step into this dungeon,
The prisoner is a merchant who
you immediately recognize its dan-
followed a wrong lead about a trea-
gerous nature. You may spend 2 Clues
sure. The merchant will pay you 50
to reveal the nature of the Final Boss
gp if you accompany him home
before encountering it.
(this will cost the party a 2 in 6
Do not use the usual system to deter- chance of an encounter on the Riff
4-5
mine when you meet the Final Boss. Raff Table). As soon as you get to
town, the merchant will share
The dungeon layout ends immedi-
some information with the party.
ately when you have generated a
Roll on the Rumors table, or on the
number of rooms equal to HCL+5.
Minor Unique Quest Table if all the
The Final Boss will automatically be
rumors have been played.
encountered in the last room. For
example, if the highest level character
in your party is 4, the dungeon will be The prisoner has no money to
completed when you draw 9 rooms. reward you, but he can give you a
All doors and openings you did not silver knife (silver light edged
visit when you draw your 9th room weapon), a vial of holy water and a
will be dead ends. map that will lead to a treasure.
For the Final Boss, roll a random Boss If you follow the map (you can do
so immediately or after resting
from the Weird Monsters Around
your party, as you see fit), you must
Town Table in this book, and increase 6
play a standard random dungeon
its L by 1. In the lair of the Final Boss,
using 4AD and/or other books as
you will find a prisoner who, upon
appropriate to your tier, or roll on
being freed, will share with the party
the Thematic Dungeon Table in
some precious information. Roll on this book, your choice, but also roll
the Prisoner Table to determine the on The Map Leads To… Table in
game effects. this book to determine details
about the dungeon.
45

=== PAGE 50 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Minotaur Maze turn is at -1. Halflings may not use
Luck in an encounter with a Minotaur.
Generate this as a normal dungeon of Reactions (d6): 1-2 bribe (60 gp),
d6+5 rooms using the standard rules 3–4 fight, 5-6 fight to the death.
in Four Against Darkness, with the
variations described below.
Final Boss
The Final Boss will be a minotaur
Room Shapes lord: HCL+5 Weird Monster, 6 Life,
Use the room shapes from any 4AD 2 attacks, treasure +1. Due to the
book you own but every time lack of power of his bull-rush charge, the
space on the sheet forces you to trun- Defense roll against a minotaur’s very
cate a room, the room has no first attack in the beast's first turn is
exits/doors and you must backtrack, at -1 and he inflicts Tier damage if he
rolling a 3 in 6 chance of getting lost. hits. Halflings may not use Luck in an
encounter with a Minotaur.
Vermin Reactions: fight to the death.
Use the Vermin Table from Four
Against Darkness.
Searching
Successfully searching an empty
Minions room or corridor in the minotaur
All minions encounters will be with maze will let the party find a shortcut
d6 young minotaurs, HCL+3 min- to the minotaur lord's chamber, if
ions, morale +1, treasure -1. Mino- desired. You are allowed to add one
taurs charge and count as HCL+4 on passageway, door or corridor, as you
their first attack. If you have any see fit, leading to a 6x6 square cham-
halflings in the party, you must assign ber.
at least 1 attack per turn to a halfling.
Reactions (d6): 1-2 Bribe (10 gp Wandering Monsters
each), 3-6 fight. The chance of meeting wandering
monsters is 1 in 6, as per standard
rules. To determine which wandering
Major Foes
monsters are met, roll d6:
Each major foe found will be an adult
minotaur: HCL+4 Weird Monster, 4 1-3: d6 immature goatmen, HCL+2
Life, 2 attacks, normal treasure. Due minions (maximum L5), morale +1,
to the power of his bull-rush charge, treat them as HCL+3 on their first
the Defense roll against a minotaur’s attack);
very first attack in the beast's first
46

=== PAGE 51 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
4,5: 1d6 immature minotaurs, in 6 if the party has a dungeon guide
HCL+3 minions (maximum L6) hireling, as detailed in Four Against
morale +1, treasure -1. Minotaurs the Abyss.
charge and they count as HCL+4 on
If the party gets lost, you must move
their first attack;
into another room – any other room
6: 1 greedy minotaur. Same stats as connected to the one from which you
an adult minotaur. Even if met as a are coming can be selected. If the
wandering monster, this minotaur room from which you are coming has
has d6xd6 gp in treasure, and a 1 in only one exit, you remain in the room
6 chance of having 1 gem worth 4d6 and must test for wandering monsters
gp, and may be bribed with any gem as if you had moved into another
worth 150 gp or more. room.
Special Events
Getting Lost in the Maze
Getting out of the maze is not auto- Roll on the table below every time
matic. Every time the party back- you roll a Special Event in the Room
tracks into an already visited room, Content Table in Four Against Dark-
there is a 3 in 6 chance that the party ness.
will get lost. Reduce this chance to 2
Minotaur Maze Special Event Table (d6)
A ghost passes through the party. All characters must Save vs. L4 fear
1
or lose 1 Life. A cleric adds +L to this Save.
Wandering monsters attack the party. Roll d6: 1-2 roll on the vermin
2
Table in 4AD, 3-4 d6 young minotaurs, 5-6 one adult minotaur.
A Lady in Orange appears and asks the party to complete a quest. If
you accept, roll on the Quest Table. If you refuse, she disappears.
3
Ignore any further appearances of the Lady in the game. If you
complete her quest, you will never get lost in the minotaur maze.
Trap! Roll on the traps table of any book appropriate to your party’s
4
experience Tier.
You may choose to meet an alchemist or healer (see the special event
table in 4AD) or to meet a dungeon guide who will join the party for
payment of HCLx 5 gp. A dungeon guide in the party will warn the
5 or 6
characters about minotaur attacks and minotaurs will NOT have their
charge bonus on their first attack. With a dungeon guide the chance
of getting lost when backtracking is 2 in 6 instead of 3 in 6.
47

=== PAGE 52 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Bandit Hideout bandits (L4 minions, normal morale,
treasure: d6 gp each, armed with light
Generate this as a normal Four edged weapons).
Against Darkness dungeon, but use If you capture the bandit chieftain
the Riff-Raff Table for Minion alive and spend 1 Clue, you have
encounters and for wandering mon- captured a wanted criminal and the
sters. Use the Weird Monster authorities will pay you a 100 gp
Around Town Table for weird Mon- bounty upon delivery of the ruffian.
sters and Boss encounters. The
Alternatively, you may leave the
dungeon layout is complete after you
bandit free in exchange of informa-
have drawn a number of rooms equal
tion (you gain no reward, but gain 1
to HCL+3 (for example, if your
roll on the Rumors Table).
highest level character is L5, it is
complete when you have drawn 8
rooms). In every room, including the
first, roll a 1 in 6 chance of finding
stolen goods. If you find any, these
will be in addition to any treasure
found on monsters. Each pile of
stolen goods will be worth 8d6 gp and
contain any item you could normally
buy in town with that amount of
money (you choose what is found).
Each pile of stolen goods has a 3 in 6
chance of being protected by a trap (2
in 6 if you send a halfling to check).
It's a L4 trapdoor. Any character that
fails to Save falls into a chamber with
a random Weird Monster from the
Fiendish Foes Table or a random
Weird Monster from Four Against
Darkness with +2 Life points. Rogues
and swashbucklers Save at +L, elves
and halflings Save at +1.
The Final Boss of this dungeon will
always be a bandit chieftain (HCL+4,
6 Life, 4 attacks, treasure: 8d6 gp and
1 random magic item from a table of
your choice) protected by d6+2 L4
48

=== PAGE 53 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Take No When playing this variant, you get no
XP for revealing Secrets.
Prisoners
To generate the content and shape of
rooms, you can use the core book
You play this random dungeon like a
Four Against Darkness or any other
standard dungeon exploration, but
book with Room Content Generation
you get NO XP rolls for major foes
Tables appropriate to your party’s
who run away (in the standard game,
adventuring Tier.
you would, as you have defeated
them, but in this game you must
SLAY them).
When a foe runs due to a failed
morale roll or for any other reason,
all the party members have still one
turn to try and kill the foe, and all
attacks performed on a fleeing foe,
including spellcasting rolls, are at +1.
49

=== PAGE 54 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Mushrooms in the described as a fungus found in sup-
plements) will be of the same type as
Megadungeon the rare mushrooms sought by the
party (add +1 mushroom to your
The party is tasked with collecting stash for every mushroom man slain).
some rare mushrooms that grow in a
Each character can carry an unlimited
huge dungeon. Use the standard
number of mushrooms. The mission
room generation system from the
ends when you think you have col-
core book. In any room that is not a
lected enough mushrooms and exit
corridor, there is 2 in 6 chance of
the dungeon. As they reach the town,
finding 1 mushroom. In corridors,
the characters will receive HCL gp per
there is a 1 in 6 chance. The dungeon
every mushroom, +2 gp per mush-
has no space limits: when you reach
room if you have a halfling in the
an edge of the paper, just add another
party. You may keep, as in a normal
sheet of paper and continue rolling
dungeon, any trea-
additional rooms as desired. You may
sure found
also find a ramp of stairs descending
during the
to a lower level. In the lower level,
exploration.
increase the L of all monsters and
traps by 1, but also increase by 1 the
chance to find mushrooms (so 3 in 6
in rooms and 2 in 6 in corridors).
The mission does not have a Final
Boss, although you have the normal
chances of meeting monsters, wan-
dering monsters and so on. Every
time you roll a special event, if you
have collected any mushrooms, a
random character must Save vs.
HCL+3 spores or lose 1 Life due
to intense coughing. Undead,
elemental and artificial charac-
ters are immune. Halflings,
wood elves, wilderness scouts,
conservationists, druids and
barbarians add +L to this
Save. Gnomes add +½ L to
this Save.
Every encountered mushroom
man (or any similar creature
50

=== PAGE 55 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Delving Deeper no matter if the room is occupied or
not. Roll even if the room has some
and Deeper other unusual feature.
In this dungeon, the deeper you go,
Play this mission as a standard
the more dangerous it becomes.
random dungeon using the tables
Increase by 1 the L of all dangers
from the core book, Four Against the
(foes, traps and Saves) and by 2 the
Abyss or from any other books appro-
number of all minor foes encountered
priate to your party's experience Tier.
per each level of the dungeon after the
In any room including corridors, you
first.
have a 1 in 6 chance of finding stairs
that go to a lower, more dangerous For example, a group of 5 L4
level of the dungeon. This chance is minions found on the second level of
rolled as soon as you draw the room, the dungeon would mean that you
meet 7 L5 minions.
Start rolling for a Final Boss only
after delving at least 2 levels
deep. Do not count the +1 bonus
to the Final Boss roll (that is, the
d6 roll you perform to determine
whether an encountered major
foe is the dungeon’s Final Boss
or not) until you are on the dun-
geon’s second level. Increase the
gp value of the Final Boss's trea-
sure by 25% for each level of
dungeon deeper than the first
(for example, if the Final Boss is
encountered on the third level of
the dungeon, increase its trea-
sure by 50%). This increase is IN
ADDITION to the normal
increase for the treasure of a
Final Boss. Likewise, increase
the minimum monetary value of
the treasure of Final Boss by
25% per extra level.
51

=== PAGE 56 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
The Adventurers equipment upkeep. Blades are sharp-
ened and oiled, armor is repaired,
Guild and plenty of writing implements and
books on a variety of subjects are
By their own nature, adventurers available for scholarly types or
tend to stick together and give mutual wizards who need to copy spells from
support to others in the same line of scrolls. The days are filled with
business. You can assume that your swordplay in the yard, study and
home town has an Adventurers Guild. scientific debate between wizards,
According to the size of the settle- games of chance, and easing out
ment, this can be anything from a muscle aches in the bathhouse. Char-
couple of ramshackle barracks where acters with little martial prowess can
adventurers can find basic services get some basic unarmed combat
and lodging, to a luxurious villa with training. After sundown, all manner
large, well furnished locales, com- of characters gather around the
plete with room service, servants and hearth to tell stories, listen to bard
a large restaurant — a proper adven- music, and recall fallen comrades, as
turers’ club. Well-known guilds are the ale and mead flow.
the League of Dungeoneers in Doran-
When the Guild hears of a new
tia (that once a year opens its doors
dungeon discovered (or is hired to do
to non-adventuring patrons as well,
a job of some kind), it will post on the
to ensure a bit of extra cash flow in a
bulletin board. Once four adventur-
month-long extravaganza called Dil-
ers (plus any hireling or animal com-
ettante Dungeoneers), the Sword
panion required) volunteer, the job is
and Grimoire Society in Kirala, and
considered “filled” and they may
the Torchbearers' House in Dussan
depart when ready. This is, basically,
Dur. For more rules and plenty of
what happens when you roll up a new
sample, ready-to-run organizations,
party to start a random dungeon or a
see Greedy Gifts of the Guildmasters.
scripted adventure.
If you create your own guild, give it
The Guild does not supply adventur-
an evocative name and add some
ers with basic items like ropes, sacks
quirky characteristics. These do not
and poles. Each adventurer is
have to translate into gaming bonuses
required to see to their own needs.
but they may inform your narrative
However, the local merchants will
when you are looking for ideas.
offer a 10% discount to Guild
Maybe the Guild allows only females
members for all common items. As
members, or only dwarves.
the merchants try to keep the rarest
The Guild attracts adventurers of all equipment for Guild members, you
types. Every member is granted a may repeat ONE failed availability
room and is provided meals and
52

=== PAGE 57 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
roll per adventure if your characters none of the risks associated with
are Guild members. banks or hidden treasure chests.
Upon completion of the job, any The simple fact of resting in the
remaining survivors pool all their Guild’s locales help characters keep
gold and gems/jewelry looted from their high morale and fight the gloom
the dungeon. Any magical items can of the evil they face in the dungeons.
be kept - the Guild is only interested Any guild member is allowed to
in currency. The Guild’s gem apprais- deduct 1 Madness point (see Four
ers will work with the local merchants Against the Abyss, Madness)
to get fair prices. between adventures.
After totaling everything, the Guild Most guilds will have an expert car-
takes 50%, and the remaining adven- tographer. If you buy a map and show
turers are free to distribute the other it to the cartographer, you can alter
50% among themselves. the map roll by 1 in either direction
(but a roll of 1 must remain a 1).
Cheating the Guild is never a good
idea; their wizards seem to know if The camaraderie between members
you try. The last person who did try is very close. If several members
got turned into a frog, and now hops succumb to the gaze or a Medusa, for
around the premises happily looking example, a rescue attempt may be
for flies. made by other members, if it’s
deemed feasible.
Members enjoy several advantages.
Besides the aforementioned ameni- Every month (every adventure),
ties, the Guild will also pay (deduct deduct 10% from the Guilds account.
the cost from from Guild coffers) for This is to pay for food, ale, hall main-
an attempted resurrection for tenance, maid services, etc. A starting
any fallen members (dead guild Guild has 5,000 gp in its coffers. If
members generate no income, after you play in Troupe style, all your
all). They maintain priests on staff Troupe members are assumed to
who will perform the ritual at cost, for belong to the same Guild.
500 gp. The ritual requires many rare
You may roll on the Guild Job Table
material components, and is quite a
to determine what kind of work is
strain on the caster. However, they
available.
will not make the attempt on a novice
All benefits are suspended if at any
(L1) adventurer.
moment the Guild has no gold in its
Any member may also keep any
coffers. The benefits are reinstated as
excess personal gold in a Ledger
soon as the Guild account is positive.
account with the Guild (or in their
The characters may NOT leave the
room, your choice), free of charge.
Guild until the coffers are brought
Keeping gold in guild coffers has
back to 5000 gp.
53

=== PAGE 58 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Guild Job Table (d6)
1-3 Roll on the Minor Unique Quest Table.
Roll on the Rumors table, or on the Minor Unique Quest Table if
4-5
all the rumors have been played.
Play a standard random dungeon using 4AD and/or other books
6 as appropriate to your tier, or roll on the Theme Table in this book,
your choice.
Minor Unique Quest Table (d6)
1 Clean Up My Castle
2 Gorungar the Mighty
3 Griffin Omelette Anyone?
4 A Portrait in Red
5 Sewers Search
6 Monoceros Hunt
In small settlements (size lower than 0) roll the d6 twice and pick the result
you prefer on both Tables. There are fewer adventurers around and you are
more likely to be assigned the jobs you want.
54

=== PAGE 59 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Clean Up My Castle Gorungar the Mighty
A noblewoman has found the An orc boss has put together a
entrance to some underground warband of goblins and is harassing
locales under an area of an ill-kept a nearby village. The town militia will
castle she just inherited. She doesn’t pay 50 gp for the head of the orc, and
have a map of the place, and servants 100 gp if he is taken alive (for exam-
she sent down to inspect the place ple, with a Sleep spell). Play this as
have not returned. Ominous sounds single combat encounter. The foes are
are coming from the place, and it’s expert ambushers are have a 2 in 6
obvious that some creatures have chance of surprising your party. If
taken residence there. Before spend- they surprise your party, all goblins
ing money to renovate the place, the will get a chance to shoot envenomed
lady asks the guild to clean up the arrows from their short-bows before
underground chambers. She will pay the combat begins, and the orc will
a basic fee of 25 gp per character, plus get two attacks per turn until he is
2 gp per every slain minion or vermin, wounded down to 4 or fewer Life
and 20 gp for every Boss or Weird points.
Monster slain.
There are 2d6 goblin archers, HCL+1
Generate a random dungeon of minions that count as HCL+3 when
exactly 10 rooms. You may keep any shooting. Any target wounded by
treasure you find, and you may spend their arrows must Save vs. L4 poison
1 Clue to find a hidden cache with a or lose their next action. The goblins
portrait of the noblewoman’s ances- have -1 to Morale.
tors, for which she will be ready to
Gorungar is an HCL+5 Boss with 8
pay an additional 100 gp. The job
Life, and performs 2 attacks per turn
must be a quick one so you may not
if his side surprises the party. He has
exit the dungeon and re-enter it later:
a two-handed axe, a bag with 2d6 gp
you must complete the cleaning up in
and wears a golden armband with a
a single session, or you won’t get paid.
ruby that can be sold for 100+3d6 gp.
55

=== PAGE 60 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Griffin Omelets, Anyone?
An alchemist needs a group of brave When you find the nest, there will be
adventurers to climb up a mountain d3+1 eggs in it. Each character can
peak and retrieve some black-feath- carry a maximum of 2 eggs. Elves may
ered griffin eggs. The alchemist will carry a maximum of 3 thanks to their
pay 70 gp for every egg delivered. The grace. Ogres cannot carry any
characters are given special padded because they would eat them. If you
baskets to carry the eggs without didn’t meet the griffins already, they
breaking them. On the way up, you will be there, defending the nest.
must roll a d6 five times, meeting a
wandering monster (use the standard
Black feathered griffins, L6 Weird
wandering monster rules from Four
Monsters, 5 Life. 2 attacks per turn
Against Darkness) on the roll of a 1
(2 damage per hit). They hate hal-
or 2, or only on the roll of a 1 if you
flings. You may flee from this encoun-
have two dwarves, satyrs or moose
ter ONLY by using teleportation
men in the front two position of the
spells like Escape.
marching order. Then, your party will
need to Search the peaks for the grif- Reactions: They fight to the death
fin’s nest. Roll d6 as many times as when their eggs are at risk.
needed, until you roll a 6 and find the
nest. On any 1 rolled, however, you
Descending the mountain will be as
are attacked by a couple of black-
dangerous as ascending it. Again you
feathered griffins unless you pass a
must perform 5 wandering monsters
L7 Stealth roll (if you succeed the
rolls using the same rules as above.
Stealth roll, the griffins will fly by but
won’t notice the party). Perform the If any character carrying eggs is killed
Stealth roll with the character with in a battle, each egg carried by that
the worst modifier. character has a 2 in 6 chance of break-
ing (a broken egg will still be worth
Stealth Modifiers
2d6 gp to the alchemist).
● Rogues, assassins: +L
If you have More Mountainous
● Halflings: +½ L
Mayhem, you can treat this adven-
● Rangers, wilderness scouts, vag-
ture as a crag dungeon of 6 areas
abonds: +½ L
instead, using the normal rules for
● Elves, wood elves, fae, lutin: +1 generating mountain adventures
found in that book, and finding the
● Shield-carrying character: -1
griffins as explained above.
● Heavy Armor: -1
56

=== PAGE 61 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
A Portrait in Red cambion, atrocity or swashbuckler.
Other character types will not affect
The characters are hired to escort a
the roll (if in your campaign any
famous artist tasked to paint the por-
character has been considered
trait of a nobleman who has taken
extremely popular or unpopular due
religious vows and now lives in a far
to his/her deeds, feel free to add or
away hermitage. Upon bringing back
subtract a +1/-1 modifier). Every
the artist and the painting, each sur-
time you roll a 1 on one of these
viving member of the party will be
attempts, one of your characters (you
paid 200 gp.
choose whom) will be kicked out of
Reaching the place means going the hermitage. If all of your charac-
through monster-infested wilderness. ters are kicked out of the hermitage,
You must roll 6 chances of meeting you must bribe the monks (a 20 gp
wandering monsters on the way to the donation will suffice) to let you in
hermitage. If you roll a 1 or a 2 on any again or the mission fails.
the first four rolls, you will meet foes
from the Outside of Town Ambush
Table in this book. On the last two Once you have the portrait, you will
rolls, on a result of 1 or 2 (or only 1 if have to perform 5 wandering monster
you have an Elf leading the marching rolls on the way home. Use the same
order) you will meet a random Weird rules as above (the foes will be from
Monster from the Weird Monsters the Outside of Town Ambush Table)
Out of Town Table. Unlike wandering but now, if a foe surprises you, there
monsters met in dungeons, the mon- is a 1 in 6 chance that a foe will grab
sters you meet will be carrying trea- the painting and run away! If this
sure, if any, as per their descriptions. happens, you have ONE TURN to kill
the snatcher with a ranged weapon or
Once you reach the hermitage, there
Sleep spell (Fireball or Lightning may
will be a problem: the newly-con-
not be used because they are too
verted nobleman doesn’t want to pose
likely to damage the painting) or the
for the portrait, judging it a silly thing
painting will be lost and you will have
which does not fit with his newfound
to climb back to the hermitage and
spirituality. To persuade him, you
start the process again… You may at
must roll a L6 persuasion Save. You
this moment decide to abort this
may roll as many times as you want.
mission and go back home.
You get a +1 to the roll for every
cleric, bard, questing knight or
paladin present in your party, and -1
for every barbarian, rogue, assassin,
undead, necromancer, succubus,
57

=== PAGE 62 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Sewers Search For Bosses: HCL+2 thieves, 4 Life,
armed with a shortword, 1 treasure
A local rogue is hiding in the sewers
roll at +1, 3 in 6 chance of surprising
after a successful hit on a merchant.
the party. Reactions (d6):1 flee, 2-5
The merchant will pay each character
bribe (50 gp), 6 fight.
50 gp if they retrieve his stolen goods
(large rolls of precious silk), plus a For Weird Monsters: Two-headed
bonus of 100 gp if they bring back the huge rat (HCL+3 animal Weird Mon-
thief alive to be interrogated. Gener- ster, 4 Life, 2 attacks per turn, no
ate a small area of the sewers as a treasure, 1 in 6 that each wound
standard random dungeon using the inflicted infects the character with a
tables in Four Against Darkness. disease that gives -1 on Attack rolls
Ignore any result that is not an until all damage is healed or a Bless-
encounter or a trap, and treat every ing is cast on the character). Reac-
special feature as an empty room. If tion: always fight to the death.
you have Thieves of Dorantia, you The thief with the rolls of silk will be
may use the Tunnel Generator on the Final Boss of the adventure. The
p.39 instead. For encounters with characters are allowed to keep all the
vermin or minions, roll on the Sewer treasure found. In addition, any char-
Vermin and Minions Tables below. acter wounded down to less than half
All empty rooms may be searched for Life will have to pass a Save vs. L4
Clues. 3 Clues will let you automati- Disease (barbarians and halflings roll
cally find the thief with the silk rolls at +1) or develop an infection that
in the next room. will give a -1 on Defense rolls until
healed by a Blessing or until the end
of the adventure.
Sewers Vermin Table (d6)
2d6 rats (HCL animal vermin, morale -1, no treasure).
1-3
Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-4 bribe (2 food for all rats), 5-6 fight.
Horde of sewer rats, L4 Animal horde, 4 Life, no treasure, automatically
4-6 destroyed if a fire-based spell hits it.
Reactions (d6): 1-3 bribe (4 food for all rats), 4-6 fight to the death
Sewers Minions Table (d6)
2d6 ratmen (HCL+1 minions, morale -1, treasure -1)
1-3
Reactions (d6): 1 flee, 2-3 bribe (5 gp each), 4-6 fight.
1d6 crocodile men (HCL+2 minions, no treasure).
4-6
Reactions (d6): 1-2 bribe (6 gp each), 3-6 fight.
58

=== PAGE 63 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Monoceros Hunt -1. The Lightning or Fireball spells
may not be used.
A large monoceros has been sighted
just outside of town. A local noble Monoceros: HCL+5 animal Boss
hires the party to capture it alive to monster, 7 Life, counts as HCL+7 on
add it to his personal zoo. its first attack due to its ferocious
charge. No treasure, normal morale.
Each hunting attempt will first
Every time the monoceros is hit by a
require a roll to locate the beast. The
non-magical attack, roll d6. On a 1-4,
characters must split up and track the
the attack strikes as normal. On a 5
beast from different paths.
or 6, the creature's thick hide turns
the blow (ignore the wound inflicted).
Roll one die per character, using the If the monoceros is captured, the
character’s Tier die and adding ½ noble will pay 200 gp to the party.
that character's L. Rangers, wood
elves, druids and wilderness scouts
add +L. On a roll of 1, the character Hunters may also spend 3 Clues to
is involved in a hunting accident and find the monoceros right away and
must Save vs. a L5 danger (rogues skip the hunting procedure described
and barbarians add +1, wood elves above. If Clues are used, the party
and elves add +½ L, rangers and members will all be able to meet the
wilderness scouts add +L) or lose monocerous at the same time. How-
Tier Life. Feel free to come up with a ever, if they use Clues, they must first
reason for the damage – maybe the roll a 2 in 6 chance of a random
character slipped and fell or was hit encounter from the Weird Monsters
by a branch, stepped on a scorpion or Around Town Table.
snake, etc.
On a result of 6 or better, the charac-
ter finds the monoceros. If two or
more characters roll a success, they
will find the monoceros at the same
time and can cooperate in its capture.
Characters who rolled a 1 are out of
the hunt. Characters who failed the
roll will join those who found the
monoceros after 3 turns have elapsed.
The monoceros must be subdued with
a Sleep spell or with melee attacks at
59

=== PAGE 64 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Solo Mission 2 as 1, any roll of 3 or 4 as 2, and any
roll of 5 or 6 as 3.
Rules
If you are playing a scripted adven-
ture where the number of foes indi-
This is a system for playing 4AD
cated is not random (such as “there
either in a GMed game or in a stan-
are 4 goblins in the room”), just halve
dard game without a GM, solo or
it, rounding down (to a minimum of
multiplayer, with every player assum-
1 foe encountered).
ing the role of one character. This
system allows for true solo gaming Major Monsters and Dangers -1
with the core book, making adventur- L= Subtract 1 L from the Level of all
ing possible with only one character. Weird Monsters, Bosses and all
This system does not alter any rules. Saves, to a minimum of 2.
It merely tweaks the Levels of major
Minor monsters -1 /-2 = this will
dangers (Bosses/Weird Monsters and
apply to the number of Minions and
Saves), and the number of minor
Vermin encountered. After rolling
monsters (Minions or Vermin)
the designated number of d6(s) or
encountered.
d3(s) and adding any modifiers for a
The numbers are tweaked based on specific encounter, simply subtract 1
the highest character level, or HCL. or 2 from the final number of crea-
tures encountered, always to a
This system uses a few notations:
minimum of 1 foe encountered.
d3= This means that the roll of a d6
Night Vision= When you see this
for the number of foes encountered
notation, the party will have no need
will be substituted with a d3.
for a lantern carrier. There can be
For example, if by the adven- many reasons: you may assume the
ture’s description you are dungeon is well lit by torches on the
supposed to meet 2d6 Fungi walls or candles, is an open-sky ruin
Folk, you will encounter 2d3 and the adventure takes place during
Fungi Folk instead. Instead the day, or the party has a magical
of d6+3 goblins, you will source of light.
encounter d3+3 goblins. If you don't see the Night Vision
notation, your party WILL NEED A
LANTERN. Also, if a character using
To roll a d3, either use a blank d6
this system later plays in a solo or
marking two sides as 1, two sides as
multiplayer game with a total party of
2, and two sides as 3, or you roll a
3 or more characters (not including
normal d6 and count each roll of 1 or
60

=== PAGE 65 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Hirelings), this rule no longer Trinkets List
applies.
When your party is composed of 3 or
fewer characters, you may have access
Trinkets
to trinkets. Here is the list of what you
If this notation applies, the can choose.
character/s have inherited a number
of minor magic items at the beginning
Scroll
of the game, or the adventurers guild
This is just a scroll containing one of
give them a little help to start their
the basic 6 spells from the Four
career. You may choose them as
Against Darkness core book. If you
desired from the list on the following
have a wizard that played the Ordeal
pages. Scrolls can contain any of the
of the Magic Tower 0-level adven-
basic 6 spells; potions of healing
ture, or if you have Ominous Opus of
bring the character back to full Life
the Occult & Obscure, you may select
points. If the notation says Minor
TWO cantrips from the lists in those
Magic x 3, the character can take 3
books instead of a basic spell.
items. They must not be the same
type. You can mix them as appropri-
ate. If the character is a barbarian or
Potion of Healing
any other class that cannot use magic,
This potion takes 1 action to drink.
you may take the same number of
The imbiber is brought back to full
Herbal Remedies instead.
health, recovering all wounds and
effects of poison or disease, but not
from the dark plague.This is a one-
Leveling Restriction is Lifted
use alchemical magic item.
If you play with 1 or 2 characters, the
XP rule that says you can't level up
the same character twice in a row is Power Cookie
ignored. Ingesting this alchemically-laced
biscuit takes 1 action and allows a
gnome, halfling, goblin or lutin to
fight as a warrior of the same Level
(adding +L to all ranged and melee
Attack rolls) for 3 rooms/areas or the
equivalent of 30 minutes of game
time. Only one cookie per character
can be eaten per game. This is a
one-use food magic item.
61

=== PAGE 66 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Enchanted Sling Bullet Candy of Hyperactivity
This one use bullet adds +2 to a single Upon ingesting this candy (an action
sling Attack roll. The bullet is wasted which requires 1 full turn), the char-
even if it misses its target. acter becomes able to perform 2
melee attacks per turn for 3 turns.
This is a one-use magic item.
Upon the 4th turn, or at the end of
combat if the combat encounter lasts
Mist Sphere less than 4 full turns, the character
This glass sphere can be thrown to the who ate the candy loses 1 Life, or 2
ground as a free action (no need to Life if it belonged to a fighting class
spend a turn doing so). The sphere like warriors, dwarves, elves and all
creates a hazy mist around the char- characters who, because of a class
acters, giving +3 to all Defense rolls ability, special skill or a magic item
performed when withdrawing or are able to add +L to their Attack rolls
fleeing from a combat engagement. or are able to perform multiple
attacks (for example, harlequins and
This is a one-use alchemical item.
marksmen).
The candy of hyperactivity is a one-
Darkness Sphere use a food magic item.
This glass sphere can be dropped as
a free action (no need to spend an
action doing so). It will give +3 to a Enchanted Bauble
single Stealth roll. You may apply this This small amulet gives a single char-
bonus to a Stealth roll performed by acter a +2 to any single Save of your
an individual. This power does not choice. It burns when used, even if
work against monsters that have the the Save is unsuccessful.
word “dark” in their name (dark
This amulet is a magic item with a
elves, dark gremlins, dark hobgob-
one-use charge. It may be recharged
lins, dark gnomes, etc.), creatures
by using a soul cube (described in
that are described as being able to see
Four Against the Netherworld).
invisible creatures, creatures that are
made of living darkness or are able to
generate darkness.
This is a one-use magic item.
62

=== PAGE 67 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
HCL 1 Character 2 Characters 3 Characters
Night vision, major Night vision, major
Major dangers -1 L,
dangers -1 L, -2 dangers -1 L, -1
1 -2 minor monsters,
minor monsters, d3, minor monsters, d3,
1 trinket
3 trinkets 2 trinkets
Night vision, major
Night vision, major
dangers -1 L, -1 Major dangers -1 L,
2 dangers -1 L, d3, 1
minor monster, d3, 2 -1 minor monsters
trinket
trinkets
Night vision, d3, 1
3 Night vision No modifiers
trinket
4 Night Vision No modifiers No modifiers
Example. If you play with a single L2 character, you have the following
advantages:
● You don’t need a lantern;
● All Levels of major foes and Saves are reduced by 1;
● When you encounter minions or vermin, roll d3 instead of d6 to
determine the number of foes encountered;
● Deduct 1 from the number of minions and vermin encountered;
● You begin play with 2 trinkets.
63

=== PAGE 68 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Using Trinkets in Your When assigning them to characters,
Campaigns the characters DO NOT get a full
quota of new trinkets at the beginning
Trinkets may be assigned to low-level
of every adventure. If they used some
characters when adventuring in
in the previous adventure, they get to
parties of 1-3 characters or found as
replenish the ones they have used.
loot. They may not be bought. Every
You may select different ones each
time you find a minor magic item
time. As the characters progress in
(potion or scroll), you may roll on the
level and lose the requirement to have
Trinkets Table instead.
some “extra help” at the beginning of
their career, they will no longer be
handed trinkets by their guild.
Trinkets Table (d6)
1 Power cookie
2 Enchanted Sling Bullet
3 Mist Sphere
4 Darkness Sphere
5 Candy of Hyperactivity
6 Enchanted Bauble
64

=== PAGE 69 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Adventurers Guild while resting in a settlement, the
bonus from the Speedy Recovery
Spells spell is cumulative. Casting multiple
Speedy Recovery spells upon the
These spells are available to study for same recipient has no additional
all wizards, elves and other casters effect.
that Save as wizards and belong to an
Adventurers Guild. They all are con-
Temporary Weapon
sidered basic spells and take up 1
Enchantment
spellcasting slot. If you want, when
you find a scroll you may roll a d6 to This spell may be cast on a single
find one of these as part of the trea- weapon, making it enchanted for the
sure (this may be useful for parties duration of a week, or until the end
that are NOT part of an adventurers of an encounter during which the
guild). party uses the weapon against a crea-
ture that may only be hit by magic
weapons. The spell gives no bonus to
Random Guild Spell Table the weapon, but lets the weapon
(d6) affect foes that normally wouldn’t be
affected by mundane weapon. While
1 Speedy Recovery
the enchantment lasts, the weapons
Temporary Weapon Enchant- feels and looks magical – if invisible
2
ment gremlins or other foes that steal or
3 Troupe Switch destroy magic items are encountered,
you decide whether the temporarily
4 Look Tough
enchanted weapon is stolen or
5 Silence of the Mouse
destroyed or not.
6 Wizard’s Luck
Troupe Switch
Speedy Recovery
You may use this spell only once per
This spell may be cast on any single adventure, and only if you play with
living creature other than the caster. the troupe rules. It works as an
That creature heals 2 Life points per Escape spell, but lets the caster trade
day, not 1 per day, when resting in a place with another character from the
settlement. This spell does not affect Troupe. The caster disappears and
the character’s healing rate during another character (who must be
rest periods in a dungeon or during chosen BEFORE the adventure as the
an adventure. If other circumstances recipient of the Troupe Switch spell
increase the character’s healing rate effect) appears in his/her stead. The
summoned character will be stunned
65

=== PAGE 70 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
by the sudden teleportation, and will Silence of the Mouse
be at -1 to all Attack, Defense and
When this spell is cast, the caster
Save rolls until the end of the current
switches the Stealth skill and modifier
encounter if this happens during a
of two characters and may ignore
combat encounter. In addition, there
negative Stealth modifier given by
is a 2 in 6 chance that the character is
surroundings (any negative modifier
summoned without armor (if s/he is
given by the setting of the adventure).
normally wearing any) as most adven-
This applies to all the Stealth roll the
turers would take off their armor
recipient of the spell will perform in
while resting at the Guild headquar-
the next hour (6 rooms).
ters. If the summoned character is a
spellcaster, you must also roll a 2 in
Wizard’s Luck
6 chance that s/he will appear
without one spell slot (you choose
Elves may not cast this spell. This
what spell is “forgotten”). This simu-
spell is used to cheat at the gambling
lates the fact that the character was
house. Whenever the caster rolls on
summoned while preparing, resting
the Gambling House Table, the caster
or meditating, and may not have had
chooses a result from the table and
the time to fully prepare for the
performs a spellcasting roll, adding
adventure yet.
+L, against that number. On a failure,
You may not use this spell multiple the caster does not manage to cast the
times during the same adventure, not spell accurately and must roll on the
even from different casters. Obvi- Gambling House Table at -2. On a
ously this includes the summoned success, the caster gets the desired
character – if you summon a charac- result. On a natural roll of 1, the
ter who has this spell, s/he may not caster is caught cheating and is jailed.
use it. The character can be bailed out by
paying a fine equal to 50 x L, plus
three times the sum gambled.
Look Tough
The spell may also be used on other
When this spell is cast, the caster gets
gambling mechanics found in other
the ability to add +L to their next
Four Against Darkness books, but in
Streetwise roll. If the target already
those other cases, using the spell
adds +L, add a Tier number bonus
simply grants a reroll of a gambling
instead.
Save or a reroll on any
gambling/game/davlok table. The
spell has no effects on solving puzzles
or riddles, only on games of chance
or games that have a strong luck com-
ponent.
66

=== PAGE 71 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Experience Tiers Rules a corresponding number that is often
Summary used to calculate a creature’s damage,
Life points or other game effects.
Some entries in recent books (for
Some monsters will inflict Tier
example, Twisted Final Fights) refer-
damage. This means they will inflict
ence your party's "Tier". This is just
1 point of damage if the party is Basic,
a quick way to determine your party's
2 if Expert, 3 if Heroic, 4 if Legend-
overall power level based on the char-
ary, and 5 if Epic. Monsters may have
acter levels.
a further bonus to damage, inflicting
The Tiers are as follows:
Tier+1, Tier +2 damage, etc.
Character Levels Tier
Tier Number Table
1-4 Basic
Basic 1
5-9 Expert
Expert 2
10-14 Heroic
Heroic 3
15-20 Legendary
Legendary 4
21+ Epic
Epic 5
Characters of different Tiers use dif-
ferent dice for their Attack, Defense,
For example, a creature with Tier+1
Save and Spellcasting rolls. The die
damage will inflict 2 damage if
used is d6 for Basic, d8 for Expert,
encountered at Basic Tier, 3 at
d10 for Heroic, d12 for Legendary,
Expert, etc. A creature with Tier +1
and d20 for Epic. In addition, charac-
Life will have a variable number of
ters of Expert Tier or higher have
Life points, based on the Tier: 2 Life
access to special skills. These are
if encountered at Basic Tier, 3 at
detailed in the appropriate supple-
Expert Tier, etc.
ments, such as Four Against the
Abyss and others. Some creature’s Life points are calcu-
lated as a multiple of the Tier
Tier Number number. For example, a creature
with (2x Tier)+5 Life will have 7 Life
High level adventuring parties will
at Basic Tier, 9 at Expert, 11 at
tend to meet more powerful foes as
Heroic, 13 at Legendary and 15 at
they venture into deeper dungeons or
Epic.
wander into more remote wilderness
locations. Each adventuring Tier has
67

=== PAGE 72 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Guild Rules Summary
● Guild starts with 5000 gp in its coffers.
● Guild pays for resurrection attempts for characters of L2+. Each attempt
costs the Guild 500 gp.
● Guild takes 50% of all monetary loot from all characters (coins, gems,
jewelry only). Magic items are kept by the characters.
● Guild members get 10% discount on all mundane equipment items.
● A Guild member may repeat ONE failed Availability roll per adventure.
● Members may store excess coins in a ledger account in the Guild, for free.
● Guild members remove 1 extra Madness between adventures. If no
adventuring is done, no Madness is removed (you can’t remove all
Madness from characters by simply keeping them inactive in the Guild).
● The Guild cartographer helps you weed out fake maps. Alter by 1 upwards
or downwards any roll on the Following the Treasure Map Table or on the
Map Leads To… Table, but a roll of 1 remains a 1.
● Each month/adventure, deduct 10% from Guild coffers to pay for expenses.
● Guild casters may learn Guild spells as basic spells.
● Guild members may find jobs by rolling on the Guild Job Table.
● There will be one adventure per month. Keep track of the passage of time
in a planner/diary. Replace dead characters with new L1 characters.
● All Guild benefits are suspended if at any moment the Guild has no gold
in its coffers. The benefits are reinstated as soon as the Guild account is
positive. The characters may NOT leave the Guild until the coffers are
brought back to the initial condition of 5000 gp.
68

=== PAGE 73 ===
Hexpaper - permission granted to reproduce for personal use.

=== PAGE 74 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
Sample Campaign setting: This map can be expanded, but we
Varian Adventurers Guild kept the generation system simple by
not including all terrain types – there
are no rivers or lakes or sea shores.
This is a simple map for a ready-to- They obviously exist in the game-
run campaign using the rules in this world, but you can assume the ones
book. You start by creating a troupe in this area aren’t large or do not
of 12 characters based in Varian, a affect play much. Assume that all
size 0 village in the center of the map. settlements have some stream or
Your troupe belongs to an adventur- minor river crossing them.
ers’ guild with 5000 gp in its coffers.
If you want to spice things up and see The Passage of Time
life from both sides of the barricade,
Keep track of the passage of time in
you could create TWO troupes, one
the campaign. You can use a planner,
of guild members and another of
writing down a short note detailing
non-guild members, and run them at
what happened each day (for exam-
the same time. There should be no
ple, ”All heal 1 Life point, Dargo the
interaction between the two groups,
rogue visits the gambling house and
other than information about adven-
loses 25 gold crowns, Merga takes
turing exploits (e.g., the guild
on martial training in the guild”) or
members will know if the non-guild
just keep track of the current date in
members have vanquished a danger-
your adventuring records. It takes
ous dragon or the like). The two
one day to travel 1 hexagon on the
groups should be considered rivals or
map, or half that time if the charac-
enemies, and should not help each
ters are traveling on horseback or
other.
have similar faster means of transpor-
The map is designed to let you use a tation.
lot of Four Against Darkness books
In forest or mountain hexes, double
if you have them, but be prepared to
all travel time – it will take TWO days
use your common sense to seam
to travel through one hex of such
everything together, as the books
harsh terrain, unless all characters
have been written over a period of
have flying mounts.
many years and some parts may fit
better than others. Remember that it Characters will need 1 Food ration
is your prerogative as the Play Master per day per character while traveling
to ignore things that do not work long distance.
from a narrative or logical point of
Healing and recovering spent spells
view. Adjust the results so that your
and daily abilities, Luck points etc. is
heroes are always challenged.
70

=== PAGE 75 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
possible only when the characters are Forests (Troll Wood, Goran
resting at any settlement. Clerics and Forest, other unmarked forest
other healers may of course use up areas): Use content from The Cruci-
their abilities (an ability that can be ble of Classic Critters when exploring
used once per adventure can now be these hexes. This lets you “zoom in”
used once per day) to accelerate heal- on the map. Treat each hex as a whole
ing, and potions may be imbibed as “forest dungeon” generated with the
usual – it’s just a matter of deciding tiles in The Crucible of Classic Crit-
when to use resources. ters. Draw the forest map on a sepa-
rate sheet of paper and name it
Random Encounters appropriately, numbering the hexes
you have explored. When you move
The chance to have random encoun-
out of a sheet of paper, you are also
ters is 1 in 6 for each hex traveled, or
moving onto another forest hex on
once every 3 hexes if you are traveling
the larger map.
on a road.
If you have The Three Rings or Man-
Feel free to use whatever supple-
Eater!, you may play these adven-
ments you feel appropriate for the
tures as soon as you reach a forest
random encounters – here are our
hex. You may play the Fortress of the
“official” suggestions, but feel free to
Warlord campaign when you visit the
alter them if you do not have the
Goran Forest or Troll Wood – just
appropriate books.
assume the rainforest in Fortress of
Plains (all unmarked hexes): Use the Warlord is part of these large
tables from Tales of the Adventurers forested areas.
Guild.
The Lost Temple: Once you reach
Hills: Use Four Against Darkness this hex, you may explore a random
or Warlike Woes for random encoun- temple using Lost Temples of
ters. You may at any moment spend Qaarra.
1 Clue in any hill hex to find the
Ruins of Calamo: To represent this
entrance to a cave where chaos crea-
ruined town, use Ravagers of Ruins.
tures hide, and roll up a random
Entrance to the Abyss: Once you
dungeon generated with Caverns of
reach one of these hexes, play a
Chaos. You may create 1 dungeon per
random dungeon using the core Four
hill hex.
Against Darkness book. As soon as
Mountains (the Ridge, the East
you find a staircase leading down-
Wall): Use More Mountainous
stairs in any of the dungeons, you can
Mayhem. You may play the Caves of
start using content tables from Four
the Kobold Slave-Masters adventure
Against the Abyss.
as soon as you reach any mountainous
hex.
71

=== PAGE 76 ===
Tales from the Adventurers’ Guild
When you move from one hex to the Balai: Size +3
other, use Fiendish Foes for your
Dol: Size +1
random encounters.
Duri: Size -2
The Cursed Town: Use Ravagers
Kel: Size +1
of Ruins to generate the cursed town.
By spending 2 Clues in any location Koo: Size +2
of the ruins, you may find the
Maas: Size +1
entrance of a necromantic dungeon
that you can generate using the Situr: Size 0
Ghastly Mine theme in this book or, Vaal: Size -1
if you have it, Digressions of the
Varian: Size 0
Devouring Dead.
Zimharsa: Size +3
Dalomai Hills: These hills are said
to be the nesting grounds of a couple
of dragons. If you are asked to play
In settlements you can play adven-
the Dragon’s Lair dungeon theme
tures generated with Affairs of the
from this book, make sure you head
Heart, or you can rename a town to
to one of these hexes.
play any published town adventure.
Settlements: Settlements represent
named villages, hamlets and so on. Expanding the Map
You may further expand these settle-
Once your party moves off the
ments using the random generation
borders of the sheet, you may print
rules found in The Lantern issue 2
another hex sheet and generate a new
(The Uncharted Settlement), or using
map. Start by placing Settlements
the full system for generating towns
using the system in this book. For all
found in Treacheries of the Trouble-
other hexes, roll d6. On a 1-4, the hex
some Towns.
is plain. On a 5 or 6, it has some
Only in Settlements is it possible to feature. Roll d6 again:
heal, rest, recover Madness and daily
1) Large body of water
abilities, and purchase new equip-
ment, performing appropriate Avail- 2) Mountain hex
ability rolls where needed. The sizes
3) Hill hex
of settlements are as follows:
4) Forest hex
5,6) Unusual feature such as ruined
town or necromantic dungeon – you
choose, based on which books you
have available.
72

=== PAGE 77 ===


=== PAGE 78 ===
Adventure calls.
This supplement for Four Against Darkness adds plenty of optional rules:
Guidelines for Troupe play;
Rules for stealth, streetwise, banking, magic lockers, gam-
bling and hidden treasure troves;
New equipment and spells;
New monster tables (riff-raff, ambushers, weird mon-
sters, chaos cultists);
Rumors, Scenes and Red Herrings;
Nine new thematic dungeons;
Rules for joining an Adventurers Guild;
Tables for Guild Jobs and
unique minor quests;
Rules allowing you to play with
1 to 3 characters;
Trinkets – six new minor
magic items;
A ready-to-Run hex-crawl
campaign.
This book requires only
Four Against Darkness
but also provides many
interactions with other
titles. D6, d10 and d12
are required to play.

